---
title: "Engineer to Manager - Decision Fatigue Solutioning"
slug: e2m-decision-fatigue
published: 2024-03-25
description: >
  A discussion on decision fatigue (ego depletion) and some thoughts around how to solve for it

---

In the transition from engineer to manager, I have observed that there is less room in my personal
life for decisions. After a long day of meetings, the need to make even simple decisions on what I
want to eat or how I want to spend my personal time has been greatly affected.

This was no more obvious than in one of my friendships. I have a friend that seems to almost refuse
to make a decision that will affect other people. Any time I ask where they would like to go to eat,
the response is to ask where I would like to eat. When I have chosen the last five ski runs and ask
which we should do next, the response is whichever one I want to do. I could tell that every time
the decision was turned back to me, I would lose some sort of energy. As I became a manager, there
was even less of that energy to lose since decisions have to be made every day at work. 

I heard the term "decision fatigue" at some point and figured that that is what I had and thought
noting further on the topic. This would explain some of the events growing up where I would
truthfully answer the question of what I wanted to eat with "I do not have a preference" and answer
the followup suggestion with an affirmation. Decisions on what to wear and what to eat take some of
that energy that could be used for larger and more important decisions later in the day.

While recently reading a book on smart note taking, I have stumbled upon the academic term for this,
_ego depletion_ (Ahrens 2022). Ego depletion is why some people eat the same thing every day for
breakfast and why some people wear the same outfit every day as these are one less thing to use the
decision making energy on. Once the energy is used, it has to be replenished before one can continue
making decisions. Decisions of self-control, responsibility, and discrete choices all deplete this
energy. 

My personality tends to focus on one aspect of my life or one interest at a time. I want that focus
to receive the majority of my energy. My energy has been poured into my day job over the last few
years and as I have become a manager, my decision making energy has been almost fully reserved and
used for making decisions at my day job. My personal life decisions get the leftovers.

I am curious on how best to replenish this energy and how to limit the expenditures of it in
the first place. I need to do more research on replenishing the decision making energy to satisfy
the curiosity of replenishing, but I have an ideas on how to start minimizing the depletion.

Small things like what to eat for breakfast and some formula to decide what to wear help--like rotating
between three pairs of pants. But these small decisions do not help with minimizing the number of
decisions required at work. Creating policy and procedure, however, does. In the world of
operations--be it business operations, manufacturing operations, or operating an aircraft--having
checklists and runbooks to follow allow for only a single decision to be made to start a process:
start the predefined process or not to start it. 

The entire aircraft industry is tightly regulated. There are checklists along every step of the way,
starting with the manufacturing of the aircraft, through operations and maintenance, until the
aircraft is retired from service. When a door is replaced on a plane the mechanic does not have to
consider what decisions to make to verify the safety of the replacement. Instead there is a
checklist of all of the predefined areas that need to be checked. Similarly, pilots have predefined
checklists for every portion of operating an aircraft. There are pre-flight checklists, takeoff
checklists, landing checklists, and checklists for every sort of emergency imaginable. The operation
of the aircraft does not have to rely on the constant decision making of what to do in these
predictable situations.

Creating these processes, checklists, and runbooks saves the decision making energy for things that
especially require the decisions. If an emergency happens, little energy should be wasted on
remembering the long series of buttons and switches needed to recover to stable flight. Instead, all
of the energy should be focused on resolving the emergency. 

Similarly in an organization, creating policy and process enables energy to be spent solving larger
problems that constantly threaten the existence of the company like the economy and competition.
Spending energy repeatedly solving small and similar problems drains the decision making energy.
This energy drain risks the stock of energy when an existential crisis happens or some other
emergency unfolds where that energy is required. It also risks the longevity of the employees making
these decisions. The lack of decision making energy has a direct impact in the individual's lives,
and if depleted too far too often, there will come a time where it is no longer sustainable for the
employee. Life partners will get upset with the lack of decision making ability in the partnership.
Individuals will get frustrated for not be making the desired progress on life goals.

The Agile manifesto pushes for people over process (Beck et al. 2001). I think a more sustainable
perspective is a collaborative approach to process and policy to support people and to minimize the
number of decisions they are required to make during a work day.


---

## Resources

1. Ahrens, Sönke. How to Take Smart Notes: One Simple Technique to Boost Writing, Learning and Thinking. 2nd edition, Revised and Expanded edition, Sönke Ahrens, 2022.
2. Beck, Kent, et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. 2001, https://agilemanifesto.org/.


