---
title: 'Getting to "No"'
slug: getting-to-no
published: 2025-02-03
description: >
  A discussion on the information gather technique of getting to "no"

---

As an engineer by trade and introvert in personality, one of my least developed business skills is
sales. The thought of executing a sale--selling myself through my resume, selling a boss on an
improvement idea, or selling a consulting package--is overwhelming. 

Friday night, at a social dance, I was reminded of the importance of getting to the first "no".  It
had been a long week of sleepless nights and I had low energy. I decided to lean into the _social_
part of social dancing by sitting and having a conversation with one of the follows. The
conversation turned to sales and learning about sales techniques. One of the techniques that they
use in their sales job is the idea getting to the first "no" as fast as possible. 

_Never Split the Difference_ (Voss and Raz) has been one of the most influential books that I have
read in the last five years. I picked it up on recommendation from a coworker in reference to
negotiating private sales. I am constantly surprised at how much it has shaped my approach human
connection in general (which sounds weird since it is a book on applying hostage negotiation
techniques to every day life).

Getting to "no" is one of the tactical empathy techniques to help a counterpart commit to a decision
or to gather information on the blockers to a commitment. While interesteing, I found it was easily
overshadowed by three other techniques that I have found used on an almost-daily basis: "What & How"
(which I have written about in [this series](/posts/what-how-overview)), labeling, and mirroring.
Successful negotiation is all about real human connection, to figure out what my counterpart
really wants to be able to give that to them in exchange for the thing that I want: creating a
win-win situation.

A sale is often set up as a trade between two parties. One party has a problem and is willing to
trade something (often money) for the solution offered by another party. Each party comes to the
table with both public and hidden information. The game of sales is often modeled as the seller
trying to maximize the sale price and the buyer trying minimize it. However, the hidden information
is key to understanding what the other parties actually want. Taking a step back from the sales
model, it seems like the underlying desire of both parties is to walk away with a mutually agreed
upon value exchange, both feeling that the value exchange was fair. It is less about a specific
price.

Both parties are investing time into the negotiation and don't want to waste it. Using the word "no"
seems like a quick way to end the negotiation and walk away with nothing to show for it. However, it
is also a safe word. "Yes" is communicating that I am committing to something, which can be scary if
I don't feel like I have enough information to actually make a decision. As a buyer, "no" is a safe.
It doesn't commit to anything that I am not yet fully onboard with.

As a seller, "no" provides saftey for the buyer to take the time they need in order to commit.
Asking a "yes" question in the form of a "no" question helps give the power of decision to the
buyer. They don't feel rushed into making a decision. If a buyer is dragging their feet on signing a
contract, a question like "Would it be crazy to expect the contract to be signed by end of day
today?" helps get the commitment (assuming that it wouldn't actually be crazy).

I used this technique with a past manager to short-circuit what was often a multi-day Slack
conversation with high risk of ghosting. "Would it be crazy for me to expect X, Y, Z by EoD
tomorrow?" Within ten minutes I not only had an answer, but had a meeting on the calendar to discuss
what I needed.

If the question doesn't end in an immediate commitment, it often uncovers additional information
about blockers. Behind every first "no" is some of that hidden information about what the other
party truly wants. That first "no" is followed by an explanation as to why, which is a valuable
piece of information that the other party is working with. It is also the signal that the parties
are in collaboration toward a common goal.

The success of a negotiation may not be what either party thinks it is before going in. It is all
about activley listening to your counterpart and finding a way to solve their problem, even if you
or your product/service is not the solution.

Wait what? How is it that a negotiation can be successful without either party getting what they
came in wanting? Take the exmaple of a salary negotiation, and let's assume that the value of the
job is only monetary and no other intrinsic motivations exist. If I believe that I am worth _X_
amount of dollars and a company will only pay me _0.75 * X_, it is a win-win for me to walk away. If
I compromise and accept the job at _0.75 * X_, I become a high risk of becoming bitter about not
being paid what I think I am worth which will negatively affect both my performance and the
performance of the team that I am on. If the company compromises and raises their salary to _X_,
there is a risk that I have overvalued myself and do not have the organizational impact to match.
Either way, the compromise is a lose-lose.

Walking away in a win-win situation where I helped solve their problem builds future value. It might
mean declining the job and referring someone else in my network that would be a better fit. Or it
might look like accepting a job with a salary slightly higher than I was expecting and an then
giving more energy to the company than I may have to help solve their biggest problems. 

Getting to "no" lowers the stress of commitment and helps gather more information, whether in a
negotiation setting or even connecting as humans in a social setting. From there, collaboration
starts and problems get solved.

---

## Resources

1. Voss, Christopher A., and Tahl Raz. Never Split the Difference: Negotiating as If Your Life Depended on It. First edition, HarperBusiness, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers, 2016.

