---
title: "'What do you do?' - Identity Dimensionality Reduction"
slug: identity-dimensionality-reduction
published: 2024-04-29
description: >
  A discussion on what we miss and cause by asking the question "What do you do?"

---

"What do you do?"

This question has somehow become the default question that we ask to get to know someone new, to
catch up with old friends, or to reconnect with family that we have not seen in a while. The
question is not quite as shallow as talking about the weather, but it is also not too deep to cause
discomfort. 

The societally expected answer to this question is to reply with a quick summary of what one does
for employment ("I am DevOps Manager" or "I work in tech") or to reply with some version of a
excepted excuse for not working ("I am a stay-at-home dad", "I volunteer at x,y,z, or something of
the sort). If one's reply, probably rehearsed, is captivating enough, follow-up questions may
follow. If not one quickly moves on and reciprocates the question to their conversational partner. 

Over time, there might be a growing feeling of discontent in this type of conversation. Having this
conversation over and over may become boring. One may come up with cheeky alternate answers to try
to shift the conversation into a new area only to exasperate the conversational partner and end up
having the original conversation anyway. 

"I do not let one specific aspect of my life define me."

"You know what I meant. You have to depend on money. What do you do to make money?"

Why the discontent in the conversation? The question expects us to choose one of our many identities
to reduce ourselves to for the validation or evaluation of others. In the US, this identity is
chosen for us as our identity of employment and with it the potential earnings, to then be measured
against either our conversational partner and/or the rest of society. My value as a human is first
measured in earning potential before anything else.

Dimensionality reduction of identity in conversation is at best a blocker to human connection. We
are so much more than what we do to make money. We are each a member of other social groups; whether
those are family, friends, clubs or other organizations. Asking someone to choose one of those
identities to identify with limits the outcome of the conversation. What if they do not like what
they do for employment? What if employment is just the means to do what they are really passionate
about, like raising a family or traveling? By asking them to choose their identity of employment, we
miss out on the stories of joys of raising a family or the passion of learning about other cultures
from first-hand experience.

The dark side of identity dimensionality reduction comes when an identity is externally chosen for
us and applied. When one does not identify with the identity chosen, it leads to conflict (Duhigg
2024). Conclusions about someone from generalizations and stereotypes are destructive. We can easily
see this with easy-to-see stereotypes like racism and sexism. However, we cannot forget that there
are additional more nuanced stereotypes as well: early birds and night owls, tall vs short, smart vs
not smart, solo-independent living vs living at home, left vs right, etc. While these more nuanced
stereotypes are not as societally detrimental to the individual, they also have a high risk of
preventing human-to-human connection when assigned to someone that does not identify with it.

Instead of applying these labels and accepting the stereotypes that they come with to create our
understanding of our conversational partner, what if we step into curiosity and make the goal of
conversations about understanding the multiple identities that our partners have and are willing to
share? What if we seek to truly understand and see the innate value that our partners have as humans
and find what they bring to the world? What if we set aside our ego and desire for people to be
interested and marvel in us (the center of our universe) and instead be that for others?

This is not a suggestion to be the change that we would like to see in the world. It is to instead
to change the world that we live in by changing our perspective. We have no control over the outward
world, we can only control our inward world (Satchidananda 2015). 

---

## Resources

1. Duhigg, Charles. Supercommunicators: How to Unlock the Secret Language of Connection. First edition, Random House, 2024.
2. Satchidananda, Sri Swami. The Yoga Sutras of Patanjali: The Book of the Spiritual Man. Start Publishing LLC, 2015.


