---
title: Learning & Operating
slug: learning-and-operating
published: 2024-12-09
description: >
  My big life decisions always seem to happen the week of Thanksgiving

---

Almost every year, it seems the week of Thanksgiving (in the US) brings significant questions and
reflection on major life decisions. Maybe it is the fact that even east of the high deserts, Eastern
Washington is still in the Pacific Northwest where the sun goes away for most of the winter. Or
maybe it is the beginning of the end of the year which invites me to reflect over another rotation
around the sun, seeing another year in the rearview mirror and future goals still out in front. Or
maybe it is a commitment issue where I feel like I constantly chase new experiences, where I am at
is never what I want to be. Or maybe it is something completely different that I have not been able
to pinpoint.

During the first few years of my career I would always question why I wasn't in graduate school, one
of the two career paths that I was considering while in university. Two years ago was the decision
to pause a part-time construction project that I had been working on for the prior two years. Last
year, it was grad school again. This year's Thanksgiving reflection is on the first semester of a
Masters degree.

Learning is one of my two core values and was what ultimately pushed me over the fence to go to grad
school. In 2023, the amount of energy that I was expending in my career was not producing the amount
of learning that I expected. It felt as if my wheels were spinning. The solution was to go back to
school in order to devote all of the hours in my week to learning.

There are only a handful of programs in the world that are dedicated to System Dynamics--the area of
study that I am really interested in--and as much of an adventure as it would be, my personal life
led me to choose to stay local and pursue an adjacent program in Engineering Management. The program
had a few courses that used systems thinking and I planned to extend the coursework of the classes
that didn't.

It was two weeks into the semester when I was faced with the classic choice: do I take these courses
for the grade or to learn the material for the long-term? Learning comes from reading (or consuming
other scholarly media), connecting ideas across the different works, and structuring those thoughts
in writing. Writing is how we organize thoughts, make a subject our own, and truly learn it
(Zinsser, p.16). The structure of courses set up in modules to ease the learning process
unfortunately does the opposite (Ahrens, p.85). Structure allows for easy isolated mental models and
easy verification of knowledge transfer, but does so at the cost of learning over a longer time
horizon; years rather than weeks.

If we assume that the goal of a course is to learn, how do we verify that a student has learned the
subject sufficiently? Verification has traditionally been done through exams which seem to identify
whether or not a student knows something at that point in time. Why do we verify that a subject has
been learned sufficiently? So that we know the student knows enough of the subject to pass the
class, to then get a degree, to be certified to the world that they have sufficiently learned a
subject.

Working backwards, we can assume that students go to university to be certified that they have
sufficiently learned a subject. They take course to pass the class, and take exams to verify that
they have indeed learned something in the last 12-16 weeks. But this exposes the competing goal for
the student. Systems thinking suggests that systems can only have a single overarching goal that is
being optimized (Meadows, p.85). If the goal of learning for the long-term starts dominating the
overall system goal of getting a good grade to eventually get certified, there is a high risk of a
balancing loop being activate to optimize for the good grade rather than learning for the long-term.

When tension exists between the two goals, which one wins? It fully depends on the student and the
balancing loops that they have set up for themselves and their personal goals with their program.
Two weeks into my new lifestyle as a student, I chose to optimize for grades; sacrificing learning
which meant I was living out of alignment with my core value. Living out of alignment with one's
core values is a recipe for quickly becoming discontent and unhappy. This was the start of
questioning if a terminal Masters program was how I wanted to spend the next two years.

Learning best comes through immersion into a subject to be exposed to new ideas. These ideas form a
chaotic cloud that connect to currently held mental models. Writing pierces through the cloud to
help organize the chaos and integrate the new ideas into a new version of the mental model.
Repeating this process results in continuously seeing the world in new ways.

The problems in Engineering Management still fascinate me. How do we best structure an engineering
organization to deliver on the organization's strategic goals? How do we improve the processes
across the engineering organization to better meet those goals? How do we grow a resilient
organization? How do we cultivate a learning organization where everyone is a leader? While
pondering these questions, I am reminded of my role model's driving principles: "Writers who
operate" (Larson). As much as I have learned through the program courses (and cemented that learning
through extracurricular writing), it's time to get back to operating.


---

## Resources

1. Zinsser, William. Writing to Learn. Harper Collins, 1989.
2. Ahrens, Sönke. How to Take Smart Notes: One Simple Technique to Boost Writing, Learning and Thinking. 2nd edition, Revised and Expanded edition, Sönke Ahrens, 2022.
3. Meadows, Donella H., and Diana Wright. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Earthscan, 2009.
4. Larson, Will. Writers Who Operate. 7 Dec. 2023, https://lethain.com/writers-who-operate/.
