---
title: "Personal Productivity vs Organizational Productivity"
slug: personal-vs-org-productivity
published: 2024-04-01
description: >
  A discussion on an interesting perspective of personal productivity from the systems thinking
  perspective and the affect that it has on the greater group.

---

Productivity is often seen as the ratio between the actual rate of throughput of a system versus the
theoretical maximum rate of throughput. The productivity of a production line can be measured as the
number of units produced divided by the theoretical maximum output, or more realistically highest
previously measured output.

Similarly, the productivity of an individual is often seen as the actual output versus the
theoretical output or potential. Those that fall short of their potential are seen as unproductive
and those that exceed their potential are seen as highly productive. In business settings, an
individual's output is often measured against business value delivered.

I have lately been working on becoming more productive in my learning; in my reading and writing. I
have recently adopted a new note taking system that makes it extremely efficient (Ahrens 2022). Even
in the short time that I have been using zettelkasten, it has greatly helped connect ideas together
and form flows of thoughts that can then be shared. With the success of starting to learn to think
in the slip-box, I started to wonder if either this system or another system was equally productive
for generic tasks outside of learning and writing.

A few months ago, my to-do list started to exceed the amount of energy used by my active brain than
was helpful. I started to write out my weekend to-do lists on sticky notes. The act of crossing
things off the list was great, but I kept finding myself leaving the sticky notes behind and having
to retrace my steps to go get it. After a few months, this got annoying and I started looking for a
to-do list or some other productivity app that would hopefully be accessible from my computer.

As someone that works in the software industry, I have a pretty extensive background in using
project management software and techniques. In my search I was looking at using that experience to
overhaul my personal productivity. But in the end, because I am allergic to spending money on
subscriptions and because I currently have some constraints in the selfhosted world, I went with a
basic note taking app that had check boxes.

This worked for a while. I would create a date entry on the to-do list page for the weekend and
start filling out the tasks that I wanted to accomplish. However, soon tasks started to overwhelm
the amount of work that I was able to actually accomplish while also creating to time devoted to
rest and recovery from the work week and to prepare for the next one. My mind drifted back to the
question of whether something like zettelkasten existed but for task management.

Like most places I start a new inquiry, I turned to Google to see what other people were doing in
the persona productivity space and what the current thoughts were on the subject. I was surprised
when I quickly came across an article that had a really interesting take on the explosion of
popularity of personal productivity, _The Rise and Fall of Getting Things Done_ (Newport 2020). 

The personal productivity movement, in the wake of the advent of email, has caused a "tragedy of the
commons" system archetype in offices; optimizing for individual productivity by asking other people
for information instead of looking for it, delegating tasks to get them off your to-do list, deep
work, and other such strategies has increased the productivity of the individual, but has resulted
in shifting the work onto another individual which decreases their productivity and thus decreases
the overall productivity of the organization (Newport 2020). 

With smart phones, texting, the migration from emails to instant messengers, and the explosion of
remote work in the wake of Covid-19, it is easier than ever to shift one's tasks or subtasks to
someone else. It is easier to ask someone a question who is likely to know the answer instead of
going to looking for the answer myself in the documentation since it takes longer for me to look for
it in documentation rather than to send a message to someone. When done over instant messenger
applications, expectations are driven by the name and are close to being instant. Lacking the
visibility into what the other person is currently working on makes the default assumption that
whatever they are working on is less important

From the perspective of a people manager, individual employee performance reviews complicates
personal productivity vs team productivity even more. Expectations of organizations and individuals
are that the individual's performance is what makes up the team's performance which is what makes up
the organization's performance. However, Systems Thinking shows that optimizing for a subsystem's
goals--or performance--actually leads to misaligned goals between the organization goals and the
teams goals (Meadows 2009). 

Optimizing individual performance risks team performance and optimizing team performance puts
organization performance at risk. However, interestingly the expectation of most companies is to reward
outstanding individual performance behavior with praise, raises, and promotions to highlight such
behavior which incentivises individual performance at the cost of the company performance. While
trying to increase organizational performance, organizations often make decisions that risk the
performance instead.

So if we are not to optimize for organization performance by optimizing team performance by further
optimizing for individual performance, how should managers be working towards driving their
organizations forward? The answer lies in alignment, both vertical and horizontal. Everything that a
team does needs to be fully aligned with the (organization's mission and
goals)[./posts/e2m-st-suboptimization] and incentives should be based on alignment instead of
performance.

The awareness _The Rise and Fall of Getting Things Done_ brought has slowed my efforts to fully
overhaul and optimize my personal productivity to make sure that the system that I adopt will not
increase my personal productivity at the cost of the greater productivity. Taking a further look
at team performance with Systems Thinking has raised the question of how to approach praise, raises,
and promotions. For now I will be sticking with my ever-growing to-do list, be conscious of
delegating without understanding the full picture of someone else's to-do list, and look to better
create visibility of all of the work. I will also be considering better ways at incentivising team
performance and be cautious around rewarding for individual performance behavior. What can we do to
"Kill the hero programmer" (Larson 2012)?

---

## Resources

1. Ahrens, Sönke. How to Take Smart Notes: One Simple Technique to Boost Writing, Learning and Thinking. 2nd edition, Revised and Expanded edition, Sönke Ahrens, 2022.
2. Newport, Cal. “The Rise and Fall of Getting Things Done.” The New Yorker, 17 Nov. 2020. www.newyorker.com, https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/the-rise-and-fall-of-getting-things-done.
3. Meadows, Donella H., and Diana Wright. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Earthscan, 2009.
4. Larson, Will. Kill Your Heroes, Stop Doing It Harder. 25 Nov. 2012, https://lethain.com/doing-it-harder-and-hero-programming/.
