---
title: [Manager Retro] Failure - Withering Personal Friendships
slug: retro-failure-withering-friendships
published: 2024-06-17
description: >
  Discussing my largest failure in my journey from engineer to manager.

---

The darkside of having a growth mindset is that there is far more attention and focus put on the
failures to grow from than celebrating the successes. However, the I think it balances out since the
lessons learned from the failures are successes in themselves.

My greatest failure in the shift from engineer to manager was a personal one: I let most of my
personal friendships wither. Instead of putting in the time to continue to cultivate them, I instead
focused on my job. I let work that was required outside of business hours continuously cancel
personal plans in the evenings and on the weekends.

Working outside of business hours is neither a good or a bad thing. Similarly, working long weeks is
also neither a good or bad thing. Spending one's time, or life energy (Dominguez 2018), on what one
values and what brings joy should be the focus. For some of us, hard work and long weeks is that.
However, as life energy is finite ("there are only so many hours in a day"), the time devoted to
work is time that is not devoted to cultivating personal friendships outside of the work place.

Balancing work and life is not strictly a manager issue. As an engineer, I regularly worked over
fifty hours a week. When it comes to being a manager, there are some nuances that make it more
challenging. Great leaders do not sacrifice their people to benefit themselves (Sinek 2017). This
includes late nights at the office/desk. If an emergency deployment is required after hours (in my
current organization they all still require manual steps which is a topic for an upcoming post in
the retro), I am not going to delegate that work to the engineers on the team so that I can go to
bed. I am going to be right there in the thick of it. I will be the first one to plunge into the
unknown and take on whatever dangers are coming our way instead of sending my team in first.

In practice, this has resulted in taking on a significant amount of engineering work outside of
normal hours. The work to fix this continuous pattern requires significant collaboration and
capacity from other teams which has not been prioritized. Upcoming posts will dive into the failures
of falling into the Trap of the Intervenor and the failure of effective communication and influence
to fix the continuing issue. 

As a result, I have not been available to visit or spend a lot of time with family. I missed trips
with friends on the weekends to take on-call for my team, as no-one on our team had the access to
fix anything if something went wrong, but we had not been able to be removed from the on-call
rotation. I missed game nights with friends because we needed to do an emergency deploy. I cancelled
phone calls to catch up with friends because fires needed to be put out.

I do not believe in regrets. Every decision that I have made makes up who I am. The lessons that I
have learned through overcoming challenges are very dear to me and I would not want to give those up
to make a different decision in the past. And at the end of the day, spending the present in the act
of wishing something could have been different in the past is time that is taken away from making
new decisions now.

I am not as close to some people as I have been. However, on the bright side, "wither" doesn't
necessarily mean dead. Some of those friendships can be rehydrated with the right care. Other
friendships have given the valuable gift of human connection that I can carry forward into new
ones.


## Graditude

Even as friends drift out of life, there are new ones to be made. While some of my friendships
outside of work have shrunk, new ones have been made at work. While some of them may stay
professional acquaintances and naturally decay over time, others have bridged the professional gap
into the personal and will continue on. Overcoming hardships together builds strong bonds and I am
extremely grateful for the friends that have invested in my life, I in theirs, and the continuing
cultivation of friendship into the future. 

Awareness is the first step in change and I am grateful that I have gained the awareness of my
tendency to have extreme focus on only one thing at a time prior to having a long-term partner. I
believe this awareness will help avoid large failures of time investment if/when such a relationship
were to exist. I am grateful that I had the opportunity to learn this when there was a lot less at
stake. 

---

## Resources

1. Dominguez, Joseph R., and Vicki Robin. Your Money or Your Life: 9 Steps to Transforming Your Relationship with Money and Achieving Financial Independence. Second revised edition, Penguin Books, 2018.
2. Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull Together and Others Donâ€™t. Paperback edition, Portfolio/Penguin, 2017.

