---
title: "[Manager Retro] Failure - Influence in Critical Decisions"
slug: retro-failure-influence-critical-decisions
published: 2024-08-05
description: >
  Discussion on failing to influence critical decisions and the lessons learned.

---

Out of all of the failures over the last few years, there is one that I have no doubt will stay with
me for the rest of my life. In fact, it is not my first time failing in the same way. However, there
is a difference this time: this time I know why and I know what I need to do to try to avoid the
same outcome again. The failure that I am speaking of is the failure to influence specific
decisions.

I have struggled with this for what seems like my entire career. Early on, I thought that this was
the case for anyone that lacked the years of experience for people to take seriously. In my first
few years as an engineer, I saw the areas where improvements were needed to increase efficiency in
systems. I observed where the industry was going with containers and infrastructure-as-code and
pitched those technologies with my management. When those ideas did not stick, I thought it was
because of the lack of years of experience that I had in the industry that led to not getting
traction. More recently, advice around software and infrastructure architectures was not taken which
led to scaling issues that could have been avoided. There have been numerous smaller events like the
above. However, I do not believe in cultures of blame. As such, I cannot throw my hands up and say that it
is the fault of those that I was talking with that decided to ignore what was said. 

Let's step back and define the generic problem. Let's say that there are three people in the room
discussing how best to solve a problem. Each one of these people are bringing with them a lifetime
of perspective which uniquely shapes their mental model of the problem and therefore the solution to
the problem. The challenge becomes taking three unique mental models and leaving with a single
strategy and building a single tactical plan to execute in the direction of the strategic goals.

There are two main approaches to getting to a single strategy. The first approach is pitting the
three unique mental models against each other and see which one wins, using some metrics to decide
(often whoever has the most hierarchical power). The second approach is having an open discussion to
change all mental models of the problem to leave aligned on a single understanding of both the
problem and the solution which builds alignment on the strategy and tactical execution plan.

I know few people that would say the first is the best way to make a decision, so why is it that the
majority of decisions in hierarchical systems are made this way? I believe that it is because
communication is hard and that it takes a tremendous amount of time and energy to truly align all of
the mental models; not only during the discussion itself, but also in actively building the culture
to support mental model alignment. A culture of psychological safety is paramount. If there is not a
space to share ideas, if someone does not feel like they can speak up, or if someone feels like
speaking up has no value, mental model alignment is highly unlikely.

However, a culture of psychological safety, providing opportunity to speak up is not sufficient.
There are communication skills that are required to effectively change both my mental model as well
as others'. I have experienced having the opportunity to speak, but that alone does not prevent the
situation of spinning our wheels trying to solve a problem. I have 
[previously written about influence](./posts/0037-understanding-and-influence.md). In that post I
honed in on the missing communication skills required in these scenarios when critical decisions are
on the line. Reviewing and expanding on that post, active listening with genuine curiosity is "the
secret" to leaving with successful alignment. The great news is that not everyone in the room needs
to be good at active listening or even know what it is!

Going back to the generic problem of three unique mental models in the room. There are two things
that are necessary to leave with alignment: a leader that is dedicated to alignment and at least one
supercommunicator (Duhigg 2024). Getting to alignment is a lot of work, both in the long term generation
of a psychologically safe culture as well as the tactical conversations with unique mental models.
Active listening, used by supercommunicators is also requires a lot of energy. A leader who is
dedicated to alignment is needed to make sure that the decision that is reached does not default to
pitting ideas against one another which is is the easier route to a single strategy. With that
dedication, the supercommunicator then essentially asks a significant number of questions to tease
out everyone's mental models so that they are essentially all out in the open. Through the act of
answering questions and followup questions, the person answering has a chance to form their thoughts
linearly and express themselves to the group. When all of the mental models are out in the open,
they will often be mixed and matched with a high likelihood of everyone leaving the conversation
understanding everyone else's and possibly leaving with alignment on the definition of the problem
and a strategic solution.


## Gratitude

I am grateful for the lesson finally learned that years of experience means little in having others
listen. I am not sure why this took so long to learn. It is generally known that there are
generational divides where those with many years of experience and wisdom are not listened to by the
younger generations.

This has been a challenging lesson to learn. It goes to the core of who I am. I am not sure where I
got this idea, but I believe that everyone has a core lie surrounding human value; some metric that
is used to rank fellow humans in value when in an unhelpful mental state. 

The core lie that I believe is that human value is equated to the knowledge possessed. When I feel
devalued or attacked, it is almost always something to do with knowledge, like being treated as if I
do not know what I am talking about. This may explain the library of books that I am amassing.
Owning the book form of knowledge counts towards my core lie of possessing that knowledge; even if I
have yet to read the book. When I feel attacked in the realm of possessed knowledge. When I feel
attacked and my defenses go up, the stories that I tell myself of the other is that they are dumb
and doing stupid things. 

It was through the failure to drive influence as the expert in a specific area that I became aware
of my core lie. It has been an immense challenge to face this part of who I am, something that I
have considered a large part of my identity for most of my life, and see it for what it is.

Influence does not come from having more knowledge on a topic than others. In today's world where
information is at all of our fingertips and the number of armchair experts is on the rise (myself
often included in this number), influence actually comes from moving past our core lies, moving into
human connection, and learning how to effective communicate through humility and active listening.

---

## Resources

1. Duhigg, Charles. Supercommunicators: How to Unlock the Secret Language of Connection. First edition, Random House, 2024.


