---
title: [Manager Retro] Failure - Individual > Team Discussions
slug: retro-failure-individual-over-team-discussions
published: 2024-08-12
description: >
  Discussing my failure of cultivating team discussions and building trust by leaning too heavily
  into my comfort zone of one-on-one discussions

---

The last failure that we will review is my failure to cultivate high performing teamwork between
team members. With my preparation to depart and as I was examining the communication structures on
my team. I observed a hub-and-spoke communication structure where a lot of the communication on the
team was passed through me. Hub-and-spoke communication structures bottleneck have an extremely high
chance of bottlenecking at the hub. 

High functioning teams operate smoothly more often than not. Each member knows their role and how
they fit into the team. They know the purpose of the team and how their contributions to the team
contribute to the overall organization's goals. These teams are characterized with high levels of
trust; each team member knowing that their teammates are executing their roles and that they have
their back (Sinek 2017).

Team meetings are one of the most important areas to build trust in fully remote and globally
distributed teams. Trust is an integral part of communication, and communication is an integral part
of trust. I have previously discussed the nuances of trust and communication--specifically effective
feedback--in [Management Trust Feedback Loop](posts/management-trust-feedback/loop). 

Team meetings are a chance for team members to build trust. They provide a space to discuss the
different solutions to problems that the team needs to solve. It requires vulnerability to pitch an
idea for others to give feedback on and to build upon. Similarly to the relationship of
communication and trust, vulnerability increases trust and trust increases the ability to be
vulnerable. Cultivating the spaces for vulnerability and trust building in team meetings strengthens
the bonds of teamwork throughout the team.

Psychologically safe teams have been shown to be the highest performing teams; teams that deliver
the most business value in an efficient manner (Edmondson 2019). As such, my number one priority as
a manager is to create a psychologically safe space on the team to maximize the performance of my
team.

My focus over the last few years on cultivating psychological safety has been to make sure that
everyone feels heard. I think that I successfully achieved this goal, as discussed earlier on in
this series ([Success - Psychological Safety](./posts/manager-retro-succcess-psychological-safety)).
However, I missed the important part of developing the skills in the rest of the team. My focus was
on my one-on-one relationships with each engineer on team to make sure that I not only heard and
understood them, but they felt heard and understood. I missed the opportunity to coach and develop
these same skills throughout the rest of the team.

A key piece of feedback that I received from my team was that a lot of discussions were happening
one-on-one and not happening as a team. As I reflected over this feedback, I realized that I had
been leaning into my communication strengths of one-on-one conversations rather than growing my
communication skills to effectively facilitate team discussions.

In the early days of moving from a peer engineer to being a manager, I prioritized the team feeling
heard above everything. My relationship on the team had just drastically change and essentially
started over and this was the most important thing that I felt that I needed to do to best position
the team to continue growing (I still feel that this was the best decision).

To cultivate the space for psychological safety, I regularly asked for questions, comments,
concerns, or ideas; sometimes multiple times a meeting. The majority of the time, this request was
met with silence, indicating to me and the rest of the team that there was nothing to add. I did not
fully believe that there was nothing to add, so I started re-asking these same questions in
1:1s where it might be more comfortable for someone to share their thoughts. 

Over time, the quieter engineers learned that I would circle back to the important questions and
re-ask them in 1:1s, so would decide not to answer the questions in the team meetings and rather
save their input until the 1:1s. My comfort zone is the one-on-one conversations, so these would be
really valuable conversations, but would have very little transparency to the rest of the team.

This pattern is a pretty inefficient communication pattern where the hub is aware of everything
going on, but the spokes sometimes are not. This inefficient pattern is exacerbated with breadth of
focus of work on the team and any increase in pressure.


## Gratitude

I am grateful that I have learned both the strength and weaknesses of being a one-on-one
communicator. Being aware of the importance of team discussions over one-on-one discussions is
helpful in identifying the skills that I need to grow in. 

In the future, I am curious if adopting some asynchronous communication processes would help in
synchronous communication. There is an idea of completing the communication loop by requiring a
response in asynchronous communication. Instant messaging applications are increasingly
becoming the backbone of organizational communication. In such an environment, if I send a message,
how do I know someone has received and read a message versus it sitting in their inbox? How does an
FYI message that does not include a call to action change this? Requiring a response, even if it is
just a specific emoji, communicates back that the message has been received and read. 

I wonder if this is an option in synchronous meetings, where we go around the table (in-person) or
through a static-order circular list (remote) to sound off with any questions, comments, concerns or
ideas. A "pass" acknowledges that the information has been received and there is nothing to add. In
addition to this, being careful at approaching one-on-one discussions on the same topics is
important. Any side discussions must be scrutinized to make sure they should be taking place outside
of the team discussion. If there is any information that surfaces that is important, it should be
brought back to the team by the source of the information (ie. if an engineer has an idea, they
should be the one to share it with the rest of the group in a team meeting rather than the manager). 

---

## Resources

1. Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull Together and Others Donâ€™t. Paperback edition, Portfolio/Penguin, 2017.
2. Edmondson, Amy C. The Fearless Organization: Creating Psychological Safety in the Workplace for Learning, Innovation, and Growth. John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2019.
3. Duhigg, Charles. Supercommunicators: How to Unlock the Secret Language of Connection. First edition, Random House, 2024.


