---
title: Influence - "Why don't people listen to me?"
slug: understanding-and-influence
published: 2024-04-15
description: >
  A self-examination of one of the biggest struggles of my career, people not listening

---

One of the biggest challenges that I have faced in my career is the feeling of not being listening
to. I decided pretty quickly that there was a "paying your dues" attitude, and building up a resume
of years of experience before people would listen. My underlying desire to be listened to is not
about feeling important. It is about knowing that my Systems Thinking perspective is being taken
into account when making decisions; not sacrificing long-term benefits for short-term gains. It is
not been about personal glory, but the constant improvement of the systems or organizations that I
am working in. 

As I have gained those years of experience and worked with more and more people, I have come to
realize that it is rare for humans to rationally seek out the expert perspectives, experience, and
opinions. And in the cases where those perspectives are sought out, they seem to be disregarded in
the final decisions. It does not seem as if the idea of "paying your dues" is accurate.

The perspectives that are not used are often the ones that are trying to prevent a problem from
occurring. Someone's experience or intuition leads them to believe that there is a high risk of a
problem developing. It has been extremely frustrating when that perspective is ignored and the
problem that was trying to be prevented becomes reality.

It is easy to think that things would be different if my perspective taken into account in the
decision. If they only would have listened. If only they could have understood the problem as I see
it. We would not be in this mess if we had done even considered what I said we should do. If only
they had seen what I was trying to communicate, right? How do I get people to listen and understand?
By inviting others to use their critical thinking skills to examine my expert mental model to
understand what we need to do? By building up the logical context and walking through the dynamics
of the problem to then present the solution or other resulting problems that we also need to solve? 

I have been through many of these situations in my career. I have pitched ideas that seem to be
ahead of their time, where a few years later someone else would pitch the same idea and get buy-in.
I have designed and built systems and have had circular conversations with senior engineers how the
system worked and defending the way it was designed. I have had product design conversations where I
was the expert in the specific product field and felt like most of my perspective was completely
ignored, resulting in years spent developing a product that doesn't yet work.

After going through many of these situations where perspectives were shared, feeling like it was
ignored, and getting frustrated, I started to look for the common thread. And I found it. In that
frustration and questioning, a very important idea emerged. "Everything would be different if people
had understood what I was _trying_ to communicate." That common denominator that I was looking for
was my inability to effectively communicate what I was thinking or how it would impact the problem
we were trying to solve.

The Navy SEALs have a term for this. Being a "tortured genius" is defined as someone failing to take
responsibility for one's actions in a situation and instead blaming it on everyone else because they
cannot see the genius of the plan and execute it (Willink 2015). Applied to solving problems,
ineffective communication leads to the same thing: blaming everyone else for not being able to
understand the genius or even the expertise that one brings to the table. 

Communication requires all parties to collaborate, but no one party can be forced into the
collaboration. They can only invited in and it is up to them to accept or reject the invitation. 

Building out complex mental models of how one sees a problem can be an invitation for others to
examine the mental model and collaborate towards a solution. However, it comes with a high risk of
information overload. While this approach may be effective in an academically monologued mathematics
paper, it requires a skilled active listener to be effective in dialogue (Duhigg 2024). This risk
can be exacerbated if dialogue participant has an insecurity of being judged for any questions they
might ask to better understand the mental model shared. If active listening is not being used by a
dialogue counterpart and the invitation to collaborate has been rejected, this is the signal that
there is more work to be done on our part. 

If we find ourselves in a conversation where perspectives are being shared but there does not seem
to be agreement, understanding, or connection, as a collective we most likely started the
conversation with the goal of leaving with all participants aligned. This alignment might have been
how to look at a problem or it might be leaving the conversation with a clear next step. The ensuing
conflict is frustrating and fraught with emotion, but it is a reminder that the goal of our
conversation needs to shift.

The goal of every conversation should be to find out what everyone wants (Duhigg 2024). If every
conversation ends with all participants understanding what everyone else wants, everyone's mental
models have been shared and understood. Cultivating this with open-ended questions instead of
paragraph-like monologues creates a space for collaboration, human connection, and seeing the
problem from new perspectives that might lead to new solutions.

Having the ability to influence decisions does not come from expertise or years of experience. It
comes from human connection and truly understanding what those around us want and need. Feeling
understood makes us a lot more open and interested in understanding others. We cannot force others
to understand us, so it is up to us to be the change that we want to see and start asking questions
to understand those around us.

---

## Resources

1. Willink, Jocko, and Leif Babin. Extreme Ownership: How U.S. Navy SEALs Lead and Win. First edition, St. Martinâ€™s Press, 2015.
2. Duhigg, Charles. Supercommunicators: How to Unlock the Secret Language of Connection. First edition, Random House, 2024.
