!! title: Workaholism
!! slug: workaholism
!! published: 2024-10-07
!! description: A story of a recovering workaholic

---

It was at the moment that I decided to use a mix of alcohol and caffeine as a means to make it
through to the end of my time here that I had a problem. I haven't let my new manager know yet, but
I am going back to school full-time. I'll be working longer hours the next four months to set my
team and my replacement up for success in my absence. 

Every morning starts with a strong cup of coffee brewed as a pour-over. The single-origin Guatemalan
medium roast from a local artisan roaster is something I look forward to every morning. This morning
is no different. Within ten minutes, I can feel the tingle in the brain kicking in from the roughly
175mg of caffeine. 

Most mornings are filled with meetings; lots of discussion with little planning or actions items to
solve the problems that we face. Two more cups of coffee get me through. With no time built between
meetings, I settle for K-cup coffee. The taste is not as good as the artisanal roast that I so
deeply enjoy, but it isn't about the taste anyway. With about 105mg of caffeine each, my caffeine
intake is now around 385mg. 

I know each cup of coffee has a strong caffeine spike with comparable dip, so my last caffeinated
drink of the day is a sencha and matcha mix that I have taken to. I know the softer effects of the
green tea will let me down more gently into my late morning meetings. My daily caffeine intake stops
at 465mg, tipping over the suggested maximum of 400mg by the Mayo Clinc. 

By noon, I have switched to water. I find a five minute window to grab a bowl of trail mix which has
enough calories to tie me over until dinner. Like most afternoons, there are more meetings and the
three to five other asynchronous conversations that I am having over instant messenger. The next
meeting is quarterly planning for the team. We're working on defining and prioritizing our projects
to see which ones we need to postpone until next quarter. The list looks small and unimpressive. But
we are an operations team. 25-50% of the work that we do keeps the other teams functioning as best
they can to keep our products updated and available.

By the end of they day I am mentally exhausted. I am no longer sure what we do as a company and I
still haven't been able to figure out what my team's role is this unknown strategy. It isn't that I
don't know what we should be doing. It has been a long year of learning through failure on how to
have conversations with executive leadership. Ever since delivering that big project last year, it
has been a scavenger hunt on what the expectations of "be better" means. But unfortunately, the
first clue is missing.

Too tired to read anything or be social, I pour myself a glass of whiskey, put on a comedy show, and
pick up where I left off in my latest sweater project. Knitting is great way to feel productive by
doing something while bingeing a show and being unproductive. An hour later I've completed a few
more rows in the sweater and pour myself another lowball. I notice that I feel a lot better than I
did this afternoon. Dopamine has flooded my brain washing away the cares of the day. Is this a
healthy way to live? Not at all. Just 89 more work days to go.

---

On the other side of my last day on the job, I can say with confidence that the problems I was
dealing with weren't an addiction to alcohol or caffeine. The day after my last day, I was back to
my normal caffeine intake of a single coffee and tea a day which I have stuck to 97% of the time
since. My consumption of alcohol immediately stopped.

I had designed and built my life around work. Taking breaks during the day to eat was a nuisance, so
I would eat while I worked. I was in an average of 4 to 6 hours of meetings a day with most of the
gaps filled with asynchronous communication about ongoing problems. A lot of those meetings did not
result in any impactful value delivered for the company.

The more work I did, the less I knew what the purpose was. I knew I had a problem, but I didn't know
how to go about fixing it. I tried countless different things during the year before my decision,
but I couldn't find something that worked. Counselling or therapy would have been smart, but that's
a new world that I haven't yet learned to navigate. Instead I did the only thing that I knew how to
do: remove the cause of the problem. My job?

But was it really my job? My best friends would always tell me "you work too much" and I would laugh
it off. Whenever a holiday would come up, they'd ask me if I was taking any extra time off. I would
laugh that off as well and come up with an excuse for why I wasn't. It was easy to do as a manager:
my team getting extra time off was more important to make sure they had the rest they needed even if
that meant that I worked through the holiday.

Looking back over my career I saw a pattern. My first two years out of university, I took five days
off (outside the holidays where the office was closed). Three of those days were because I was
feverish and physically couldn't work. I burnt myself out which resulted in taking a seven month
sabbatical to recover before heading back into the industry.

What happened next? I worked for two and a half years with the only a week taken to recover from
COVID. Later than year, during my first three day family vacation, I was exhausted and a wreck. I
woke up the third day to missed phone calls from the last five hours from multiple people from our
global workforce. Our product had been struggling or unavailable for that time and our reputation
was being damaged. The company learned from that experience and set up an on-call rotation to make
sure we had coverage while someone was away on vacation. I also made the decision to take at least a
full week off every year.

I set aside the week of my birthday, so that it was easy to remember. Every year I'd get to the week
of my birthday with a laundry list of projects that I needed to do around the house. It was a
perfect fall week to prepare the house for winter. While I took time off from work, vacation wasn't
part of it.

I found myself considering my PTO balance almost as a badge of honor, not as a serious sign of rest
deprivation. It wasn't until this year (2024) that I decided that I would use my PTO balance and
commit to taking a full week off every quarter. I took my first real week of vacation seven years
into my career (not including the seven month sabbatical). Unfortunately, I was too late to fix the
burn out to stay in my current position.

Workaholism isn't working over some specific number of hours a week. It isn't working long days.
Long hours working towards a goal that is aligned with your WHY brings fulfillment. Workaholism is
sacrificing things like relationships, personal health, and joy to "produce more". 

The rush of dopamine from checking something off a list. The adrenaline high from the constant
stress of everything being urgent. Monitoring dollars in a bank account that constantly lose value.
Building insurance for later in life in the form of assets. None of these are bad in moderation. But
when the end is sacrificed for the means, that is where workaholism becomes a problem. Being
productive, being adaptable, supporting yourself and family, and planning enough for tomorrow are
all things that should bring life. But when life is sacrificed for these things, we are sacrificing
the end for the means. We miss the point.

I am at the very beginning of my recovery journey; starting in on 2 years of graduate school where
the temptation to overwork is high. But it is also a place to build the habits that I need without
my crutch of "people at work depending on me". Through this time of recovery, I am going to keep my
commitment of one full week off per quarter and I am going to build the basic skill of finding joy
in work rather than sacrificing joy for work.

---

## Resources

1. Mayo Clinc: https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/caffeine/art-20045678
