!! title: The Power of WHAT & HOW - Negotiation
!! slug: what-how-negotiation
!! published: 2023-10-23
!! description: Explore the power of WHAT & HOW in negotiations

---

The second area of impact of the words WHAT and HOW is negotiation. If you haven't read _Never Split the Difference_ by
Chris Voss, stop reading this article, go order it on what whatever platform you consume books, and get ready for one of
the most important books of the last decade. In a world that is getting driven further apart with the echo chambers
online, _Never Split the Difference_ starts helping cultivate empathy for others; getting more of want by first giving
what our counterpart on the other side of the table what they want. 

Negotiation happens any time two parties come together with different desires. This could be the clich√© salary or
business negotiation, or it could be the decision of which movie to watch on date night. Chris Voss posits that
compromise is a lose-lose scenario; both parties failing to get what they want. How do we actually get what we want?
Give the other person what they want first.

How can we give our counterpart what they want without losing everything? Negotiations are normally on a single
dimension scale. When negotiating for a salary, money is the obvious dimension. The potential employee wants to maximize
their salary while the business wants to minimize the cost. However, humans are not single dimensional. Very rarely is
it the case where the potential employee only cares about maximizing the monetary value of their salary. The employee
might care a lot more about learning than the highest salary in the range. Maybe they care more about the title. And on
the flip side, the organization might care more about longevity in the role over a higher salary. And there are many
many more values on both sides of the table that factor into the conversation about salary.

How do we find those other values? We use something that Voss calls Tactical Empathy. We have to go on a treasure hunt
for those values. They are not going to come up naturally in these types of conversations. A lot of people's
perspectives on negotiations are grappling for a better position to overcome the counterpart. Information is probably
not going to be flowing freely. However, there is another perspective to go into a negotiation with: to find the best
solution that is a win-win for all parties involved. Can you guess what a key piece of Tactical Empathy is?

You've guessed it: WHAT and HOW! Questions that start with WHAT or HOW are open-ended and require our counterpart to
pause and consider the question; helping us by answering it. Go back to the first sentence in the above two paragraphs
and see you felt when I posed the question. Did you have an answer for the questions? Or was your mind primed with a bit
of curiosity?

To gain a better understanding of our counterpart, we have set aside what we think we know and adopt a mental attitude
of persistent curiosity. We will not be satisfied until the our counterpart feels understood, not just us thinking we
understand them. With the mentality of persistent curiosity, our assumption set aside, we dive into WHAT and HOW
questions to gather that information to build our understanding so that we can find that win-win scenario.

Voss has two other techniques to use alongside WHAT and HOW questions: mirroring, and labeling. More information on
those can be found in _Never Split the Difference_.

Now what does negotiation have to with the Sinek's Golden Circles? Well, if we presume that every individual have
different perspectives and desires when it comes to how an organization should operate or exist in the world, then we
need to align perspectives and build the core WHY that is so important to the success of the organization. "Aligning
perspectives" is just another name for "negotiation". Entering into a dialogue, both parties want the other party to see
things the way that they themselves see it; a shared perspective. This seems like a single dimension opposing desire
which is where "negotiation" techniques seem to be relevant. 

How do we get the other party to understand us and our perspective? We persistently ask question, mirror, and label
until they feel that we understand theirs. As we are persistently curious and try to understand our counterpart's
perspective, our WHAT and HOW questions will require them to see some of the things from our perspective as well. "How
can I can I stay in this apartment with the $100 increase when the apartment around the corner is $25 cheaper than the
rate right now?" This question asks the manager to come up with an answer, and to do so with any sort of success
requires taking on the perspective of the renter. WHAT and HOW questions can not only be used to persistently chase the
perspective of others, but also ask them to see ours.

Once the WHY has been established and aligned upon, we can use the same techniques to build the organization's WHAT and
HOW to build the strategic goals around the organization mission. And from there, we can go back to the first post in
the series about aligning the rest of the organization around this mission and the goals to achieve it.
