!! title: Engineer to Manager - Marbles & Leadership Capital
!! slug: e2m-marbles
!! published: 2023-12-03
!! description: Two weeks into my new career as a people manager, I had to make one of the toughest choices that I have had to make as a leader: deliver business value or build team trust

---

A few years ago, I became the first DevOps Engineer at my current company. I was excited about the
career growth potential and the potential to shape DevOps practices and methodologies at a small
company. Some of my expectations were met a lot faster than I thought and we are still working on
some of others (and they may never be met). I joined with the hope of gaining a lot of experience
and was hoping for a Lead DevOps Engineer role in about two years after starting. It turns out that
eleven months later we needed to make official the job description and expectations for the work
that I was doing and my manager pulled me up to Lead DevOps Engineer. After a few months, my manager
pulled me up into the Manager role. At the time, there were two engineers on the team with two
positions open.

One of my two core values [[1](https://brenebrown.com/hubs/dare-to-lead/)] is Learning. I knew this
position was a completely different set of skills, but I was eager to learn. With the quick growth
of the team, there wasn't a chance to be a Tech Lead Manager where I could retain some of the
technical design and implementation work through the transition into People Management as a coach
[[2](https://lethain.com/elegant-puzzle/)]. (*Note:* the later expectation of being a Tech Lead
Manager with five engineers instead of a People Manager has led to strain and inefficiencies in the
team which I will dive into in a later post. Larson's experience shows that a Tech Lead Manager can
really only be successful with less than four engineers to oversee, while being career stunted
because there isn't time to grow management skills). 

As a Lead Engineer, I approached most technical decisions with everyone (all three of us) needing to
be onboard with the direction; not actively disagreeing or pushing back. As a Manager, my primary
responsibility was no longer to set the technical path. This was put to the test my second week as a
Manager.

Paul Santagana, the Head of Industry at Google did a two-year study on what makes teams high
performing and found that the common thread of high performing teams was Trust
[[3](https://www.acc.af.mil/Portals/92/Docs/ACC%20Bridge/Physcological%20Safety/HBR%20Harvard%20-%20Psych%20Safety%20copy.pdf?ver=PZYHiFFdxHXHSm39BAxisQ%3D%3D)].
High performing teams trust that everyone else on the team has the team's best interest in mind and
that the leader will be the first into the unknown
[[4](https://simonsinek.com/stories/the-circle-of-safety/)]. Every interaction in any relationship
either adds or removes trust. Brené Brown calls this the marble jar of trust
[[1](https://brenebrown.com/hubs/dare-to-lead/)]. Jocko Willink calls it Leadership Capital
[[5](https://echelonfront.com/how-to-build-and-spend-leadership-capital/)]. Focusing in on the
relationship between manager and direct report, every observation and interaction that you have with
your direct reports either adds marbles or removes marbles; making a deposit or spending Leadership
Capital.

There are behaviors on every team that does not serve and push the team forward. Feedback is
required to (re)set expectations in order to start the behavior change and to make that change.
Behavior change is so much more effective when fear is removed from the equation; fear of looking
dumb, fear of not being a part of the team, fear of losing out on a promotion, fear of losing a job.
However, if the majority of the time is used to focus on building trust on the team, when delivering
feedback, the direct report knows it is because their leader desires the best for them personally
and is supporting them as a human.

The second week as a manager we were looking to deliver a large multi-quarter project and we had two
technical options, neither explicitly the wrong way to do it. I believed in one of the options and
my direct reports believed in another. I had a decision to make. I could either push the idea that I
believed in or I could decide to go the way that my team wanted to go to add marbles to our jar. It
was a tough decision and both were equally right from different perspectives. I did not feel like I
had enough Leadership Capital saved up to ask the team to do something that they didn't believe in
and I was too new to being their leader to ask them to do it solely on their trust in me. There
wasn't enough. This was the first big decision that I had as the manager and I knew that it would
set the tone for my leadership on the team.

That night was a really long night after a release-gone-bad, with the downtime I had between support
tasks, I spent time building out a POC of what the idea that I was thinking. I felt that I wasn't
clearly communicating the ideas in my head and I wanted to make sure that it was fully understood
before deciding against it. By the end of the night, I had a mostly working POC save a single issue.

I asked my team to take one week to experiment (now my favorite word in management) with solving
that issue, and if we couldn't solve it, we would decide to go the other way. I knew that making
this request would spend some of the very little Leadership Capital I had, but it wouldn't spend all
of it. And if/when I was wrong and we switched back, then I believed more trust would be gained.
This request did a number of things: it strengthened my new leadership role, it requested action
even with low belief that it was the correct way to go with small loss of feeling like we wasted a
week of work, it showed that I was okay being wrong, and in the long run showed that I would listen
and be okay with failure.

It was a tough week. I could tell that the team was struggling against something hard that they
didn't believe in. But they made it to the end of the week. By the end of the week, we weren't able
to make the headway needed to continue, so as decided the week before, we switched to the other
option. Unfortunately, almost two years later with a lot of priority switching, we have not yet
delivered the capability we were originally after. And when we start in on it again, the team is
aligned on a different direction. The technical outcome is not to say that I was originally right
and the team was wrong. I believed (and still believe), with all of the technical implementations
that have gone through my engineering brain, the one I believed in seems the simplest and most
robust.

However, I am no longer an engineer. My job is to build trust, coach, support, and pull up my team.
I might be 100% right or 100% wrong. That isn't the point. The point is that I chose to build trust
with my team. We might not have delivered the business value that we were trying to, but a lot of
trust was built through the process. And in that decision I set the tone as a leader that I would
listen and support the team over demanding the team to follow.

No matter what the "right" technical direction was--between the original two or even another one yet
to be discovered--I believe the right decision was to build trust. That solid foundation of trust
became critical a year later when the team was put through over six months of immense amount of
pressure to deliver second complete production environment. I made a lot of mistakes during that
time (I'm still analyzing and wading through them and most will be the topics of future posts), but
we ended up delivering the entire project on time and exceeding expectations. I believe that it was
only because of the environment of trust on my team that allowed us to do that and allowed the
mistakes that were made with the trust that it was for the best of the team.

This is not just what it means to be a manager. This is what it means to be a leader.

---
## Resources

1. [Brené Brown: Dare to Lead](https://brenebrown.com/hubs/dare-to-lead/)
2. [Will Larson: An Elegant Puzzle](https://lethain.com/elegant-puzzle/)
3. [Laura Delizonna: High-Performing Teams need Psychological Safety](https://www.acc.af.mil/Portals/92/Docs/ACC%20Bridge/Physcological%20Safety/HBR%20Harvard%20-%20Psych%20Safety%20copy.pdf?ver=PZYHiFFdxHXHSm39BAxisQ%3D%3D)
4. [Simon Sinek:  Circles of Safety](https://simonsinek.com/stories/the-circle-of-safety/)
5. [Jocko Willink: Leadership Capital](https://echelonfront.com/how-to-build-and-spend-leadership-capital/)

