!! title: Operations Leadership: Learning more from failure
!! slug: leadership-learn-from-failure
!! published: 2024-03-10
!! description: The story of when I learned more about operational leadership in three hours than my entire career in software operations.

---

It was complete chaos. Rescuers were running back and forth between scenes. There was a constant
stream of victim vital data flowing in on the radio. Radio communication was breaking down. Extra
rescue teams were being sent out to provide support where they could, but then getting split up when
on of the another victims needed something specific. There were too many rescuers attending victims
that didn't need it and not enough for the ones that did. It was madness.

---

We were on day six or seven of a nine day Wilderness First Responder course to be trained and
certified in backcountry medicine. A few hours before, an operations manager had been chosen by the
instructors to manage the emergency scenario. There was also a communications officer appointed and
the rest of the group was split up into teams of two rescuers. We had just gotten two rescue calls.
There was a pretty bad ATV accident, and a hiker that fell and probably broke their leg. They were
both in the same vicinity, but about a mile apart (but in reality, closer to 25 meters). In total,
we knew we had three victims before we set out.

The initial wave of three rescue teams were sent out from the base of operations. My partner and I
were held back at base as one of the auxiliary rescue team to lend support to the initial teams as
needed. Almost as soon as the initial teams arrived on scene, the radio started blowing up with
initial descriptions of the victims. The communication protocol that we had been learning for the
last few days was immediately forgotten.

The scene of the ATV accident, the driver had a part of the ATV lodged in their abdomen. The rider
had been thrown and had a significant amount of blood covering their face. They couldn't see. And a
mile away, the hiker seemed to have a complete fracture of the femur (thigh bone). 

As these descriptions were coming in, the auxiliary teams were dispatched out to the scene of the
ATV accident. My partner and I headed to the scene of the ATV rider. When we got there, a full
head-to-toe had not been completed. There was a lack of physical space around the victim and no
actual role for my partner or I to take on. No sooner had we gotten to the initial rescue team, than
the communications officer got in touch with my partner and asked us to split up (he was the one
with our radio). I'd stay with the initial team and my partner would head over to the hiker.

A little while later, the operations manager radioed all of the teams asking for any available hands
to head to the hiker. It had been decided that she needed to be moved since she wouldn't be walking
any time soon. We needed at least eight people to move her on a backboard (the initial rescue team
and the full force of the auxiliary teams that had already been dispatched to the ATV scene).

I left the ATV scene and headed towards the scene of the injured hiker. One of the initial rescuers
of the ATV rider victim decided that victim seemed stable enough to leave only one rescuer there
with a radio to help go move the hiker. When I got there, the rescuers didn't have a backboard, they
had not completed their head-to-toe which needed to be finished before the hiker could safely be
moved, and it seemed like the overall scene was in a bit of disarray.

While we were waiting for the head-to-toe to be completed and the backboard to be brought, a frantic
call came over the radio. The victim that I just left had fallen unconscious. Worsening symptoms in
the backcountry is never a good thing. Falling unconscious is even worse. My partner immediately
left to help as did the initial ATV rider rescuer that came with me. I decided to stay with the
hiker group to help pull the disarray together.

Some quick observation showed that the initial rescuer that had taken lead of the hiker scene upon
arrival was really struggling to remember the processes and checklists that we needed to complete. I
made the decision to take over as lead of the scene. It wasn't the most graceful execution I could
have and there is probably a more diplomatic way of handling the situation. At the time, I asked if
I could help, and then gently took over control while they gave it up. The other rescuers looked
relieved and mouthed "thank you" as things got back under control and started moving in the
direction of stabilization. 

The head-to-toe was completed and we got the first set of vitals soon to follow and started gather
medical history information. The backboard arrived and we got the victim situated, put out the call
that the hiker was ready to be moved, and went into vital monitoring mode. As there were more severe
victim cases elsewhere, we were told that we'd be waiting for a bit. The scenario was called a short
time later. 


## Lessons Learned 

During review post-scenario, I have learned a number of things that are extremely important in
operations management.


### Communication & Protocols

We started the scenario without any protocol on radio usage on a shared channel which made the
radio almost impossible to use. It got to the point where the communication officer was running
between the groups and the operations manager to get the information. While this kind of worked in
the scenario, if we had been a mile apart like in the scenario, this would have been impossible.

For the week previous to the exercise, we had all been learning about the SOAP Notes (Subjective,
Objective, Assessment, and Plan) communication protocol (Podder). We had even learned how and why
the structure of it was important given high interference on radio transmissions. Instead of
gathering all of the situational information and composing a SOAP notes report and then sending that
full picture to the operations manager (which would have taken about 15-20 minutes), it was felt
that immediate communication and action was needed. This made the time-to-first-call pretty short,
but it significantly increased the amount of time to a full SOAP report. I don't remember the
operations manager getting a full SOAP on any of the three victims. Which leads right into the next
lesson that I learned.


### Data Driven Decisions

Almost all of the decisions in the scenario were made reactively from the subjective descriptions
from the rescuers. We had all learned the SOAP Notes documentation method and how useful it was to
use a widely known structure of delivering healthcare information. Using an unstable radio
connection, the receiver knows how to map the incoming data to the chart and know what to
anticipate. If the radio cuts out during the transmission, the receiver knows where in the notes
they were lost and can ask for a repeat until they get the whole report.

All of the initial rescuing teams immediately started communicating the state of their victim which
flooded the radio channel with information that was difficult to assign to the victims. From the
perspective of the rescuing team, they were getting the information back the operations manager as
fast as possible, but a lot of it wasn't truly actionable.

However, it was an emergency scenario. So the manager felt the need to take immediate action, even
though there wasn't really any data to tell where the auxiliary teams should be dispatched. So we
were all dispatched evenly throughout the victims until later needed.


### Resource Management

Before the scenario started, I overheard one of the instructors prepping our chosen operations
manager. In that brief was a hint that keeping auxiliary teams at base until they were needed should
be considered. Initially, we were kept at base. But as soon as the first victim descriptions came
over the radio, the operations manager was spurred into action and dispatched all auxiliary teams to
help. When the auxiliary teams were needed elsewhere, they were pulled back and redeployed. This
happened more than a few times as the operations manager got more data. If we had been one or more
miles apart like in the scenario, redeployment would not really be an option.


### Time Management

There was a time management portion to the lessons that I learned. Interestingly, the underlying
issue to the chaos was that decisions were being made quickly without the correct supporting data.
The time pressure of the emergency (on both the rescuers and the operations manager), the
information communication rate, and the delay of full information coming from what should have been
SOAP reports from the initial rescuing team all led to a oscillatory system in available rescuers in
the auxiliary teams.

A better approach here would have been to thank the initial rescuers for the data and then request
them to keep the line clear until their SOAP notes were ready. This would have decreased the amount
of activity for the operations manager, but would have also decreased the amount of radio chatter
and would have prevented the oscillations in auxiliary team availability based on no data.


### Leadership

This lesson was an interesting one. My takeover of the hiker victim scene did not sit well with me.
In reality, we were all there to learn and struggling through remembering what to do would have
probably been the best way for my fellow student to learn. The main memories and lessons I have from
the scenario were where we failed as a group or where I failed as an individual. I have very little
recollection of the things we did right. By taking over the scene, I also took away the opportunity
for that student to learn through their failures.

I don't regret the decision I made to take over the scene and I would make the same decision again
today. However, the leader I am now would be more confident, diplomatic, and also circle back to
apologize after the scenario was over; to mend any rift in the working relationship that might have
happened between me and the initial rescuer that took lead. I have been in similar situations in my
professional career in engineering operations where decisions need to be made and they need to be
made quickly. Circling back is even more important in a long term professional setting where you
work side-by-side with people for years instead of the scenario where the rescuers barely knew each
other.

There are crucial decisions that leaders have to make. And sometimes these decisions are between two
solutions that have significant costs. This decision is an example of one of those decisions (and I
talk about one in my second week of being a manager [here](./posts/0020-e2m-marbles)).


### Command & Control

It was not until last year that I learned about the important components of what makes command and
control work. Emergency situations require some amount of command and control more often than not.
But it is what is done outside of the command and control situations that build the trust. A high
performing military team may need to operate in command and control, but they only do it about 2% of
the time. The other 98% of the time is spent doing exercises and team bonding to build the trust
required for that 2% (Willink).

Unfortunately, often times there is not a lot of effort invested in that 98% of the time in software
operations. It seems like it is from one fire to the next; one emergency to the next. Creating
independence and self-organizing sub-teams is very challenging in such an environment.


## Importance of Role-playing and Simulation

This entire scenario was fictitious. No one actually got in an ATV accident and there was not a
hiker who actually snapped their femur. However, in this fictitious three hour scenario, I learned
more about how to run operations under pressure than in years of working in operations. Role-playing
and simulation is a very important part of Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics. It allows for the
testing of policies and policy changes in a safe environment. "In many cases controlled experiments
are prohibitively costly or unethical" (Sterman 21). 


---

## Resources

1. Podder V, Lew V, Ghassemzadeh S. "SOAP Notes". StatPearls Publishing, 2023,
   https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482263/. Accessed 09 Mar. 2024
2. Sterman, John D. Business Dynamics : Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. Boston,
   Irwin, 2000.
3. Willink, Jocko. Critical Leadership Training. In: Masterclass. Available from:
   https://www.masterclass.com/classes/critical-leadership-training-with-navy-seal-officer-jocko-willink-continuous-cut.
   Accessed 06 Sept. 2023
