!! title: [Manager Retro] Success - Psychological Safety 
!! slug: retro-success-psychological-safety
!! published: 2024-05-13
!! description: {{ RSS DESCRIPTION }}

---

In my time as a manager, the greatest of achievements has been the trust cultivated in each
relationship with my direct reports. Every action that is taken includes a trust component. The
action either adds trust to the relationship or removes it. While every relationship follows this
ebb and flow of trust, in a hierarchical system like a company, the most important view is the trust
is between direct report and their manager. Every action by the manager adds or removes trust in the
relationship. Brené Brown calls this idea the marble jar (Brown 2018). Jocko Willink calls it
leadership capital (Willink 2015). 


### Leadership Capital

There are those that define leadership as making all of the decisions for a group. The idea of
taking charge and moving forward with everyone falling in line behind and following. This
command-and-control leadership is what people often think of when they think of leadership in the
military.

There are others that define leadership as fostering a discussion and coming to a consensus as a
group on which direction to take. Most tasks require full alignment from the group in order to
succeed. From the history of the United States, if the thirteen independent colonies could not align
on a direction, there would not have been unification. It took decades of discussions (and one could
argue that those discussions continue today) to figure out the details, but there was an overall
alignment on succession.

Both of these definitions of leadership are correct. There are situations where command-and-control
is needed and there are situations where group consensus is needed. For any group that has a
command-and-control structure, the success of the outcome is fully dependent on the group trusting
that the leader has the group's best interest in mind (Sinek 2017). It is important to apply the
correct style of leadership to the situation. Misapplying can lead to unwanted results.

To use a command-and-control structure effectively, there must be immense amount of trust in the
relationship. Trust is rarely built by giving and receiving orders with no opportunity to ask
questions. Trust must be cultivated outside of the command-and-control structure, which means that a
different leadership style must be used the majority of the time. This other style's goal is to
shepherd the entire group in one direction in a unified manner.

From a Western philosophical perspective, consensus takes on this idea of arguing logically to get
to a point where all parties agree. In a world where logic rules emotions, this might work. However,
all humans have an amygdala that processes all thought with emotions prior to getting to the
prefrontal cortex to process it logically (Brown 2018). Getting to a place where the entire group is
aligned and moving in single direction together is actually about getting to a point where everyone
has felt heard and understood. When someone feels heard and understood, they are more open to
hearing and understanding others which will eventually get to a place where a unified direction can
be achieved (also known as consensus). Active listening and getting to a place where someone feels
heard and understood grows leadership capital immensely. 


### Feedback - Direct Report

We have talked a bit about the importance in the actions of the manager, but I can hear you asking
"What about actions of the direct report and how they affect trust in the relationship?" You are
right. Every action that a direct report takes also has a trust component. However, very rarely
should an action by a direct report cause a decline in trust from the manager's perspective. If a
manager observes an action that risks a decline in the trust in their direct report, immediate
action must be taken to have a conversation with the direct report with the potential to give
feedback around behavior that is expected; behavior that will not lead to less trust in the
relationship.

Note that I said "potential to give feedback". The remote-work setting creates challenges in
observations of situations and behavior which is the key to success in the SBI Feedback framework
("Use Situation-Behavior-Impact (SBI)™ to Understand Intent"). I have often found my expectations
not being met by engineers on my team, only to come to the realization that the observations that I
thought I had was my brain creating gap fillers in the data that was available for me to try to
understand the situation. This is a normal function of the brain--looking for patterns and trying to
explain what is being observed. But it is extremely risky to act on conclusions drawn from these
observations as they have a high chance of not being founded in reality. 

When expectations are not met, there is a high chance that any of these conclusions based on
brain-created data cause an emotional hook or amygdala hijack (Brown 2018). Brown calls this process
"the stories we tell ourselves". Brown goes on to describe that every person has different way of
physically responding when the amygdala is hijacked. Identifying your own response is an important
step to being able to use that trigger to become aware of the hijacking in the moment, pause, take a
step out of the emotional thoughts and reevaluate from a more rational mindset to verify that the
emotions are based on facts versus a personal reality that might be filling gaps in those facts.

When my amygdala hijacks my thinking process, I go into "fight" mode. I get a massive adrenaline
dump, my heart rate quickens, my breath quickens and grows more forceful bringing more oxygen into
my system, and my shoulders rise and tighten. When I notice this, I write down my thoughts, the
stories that I am telling myself, and the feedback that I want to give in response to those stories.
Once those are written out, the stories stop going around in my head and set them aside for a day or
so. In our next one-on-one I start by asking about the other's perspective of the situation from the
perspective of trying to get caught up and understanding what is happening. Understanding what is
happening is actually the whole point and needs to happen before effective feedback can be given and
before I can truly work to understand the situation, I must get the stories I am telling myself out
of my head. 

There have been times when the situation is as I have observed and other times when what I observed
was widely inaccurate. Giving feedback in the latter case causes conflict in the relationship and
removes some of the trust that has been built up. I have found it extremely important to gut-check
myself from a rational mindset, questioning every emotion that I have in the situation, before
delivering feedback. This avoids removing trust from the relationship and instead builds more trust
and leadership capital into it.


### Feedback - Manager

Asking for feedback on how I am doing as a manager is another important way of building leadership
capital and trust. Routinely asking for feedback communicates that I am interested in my direct
report's perspective of how the team is functioning to better improve team work. It also
communicates that I am open to receiving feedback to improve myself or to improve the working
relationship and it provides an opportunity for the direct report to ask for something to feel more
successful that they might not be getting from the relationship.

This routine request for feedback normalizes giving me feedback and removes any apprehension from
how I might respond to feedback that is critical to the success of the team but is hard to hear.
Giving feedback is a skill. Just like in health sciences, if those muscles are not exercised with
high reps and low to medium resistance, it is going to be a lot more challenging to deliver the high
resistance feedback when it is critical. This also goes for the manager giving feedback to the
direct report. (Normalizing both positive and negative feedback is important in high performance
teams)


### Gratitude

I am overwhelmingly grateful that I have had the opportunity to learn first-hand about the
importance of trust and how to cultivate it on a team. Groups of people live and die by the
trust--or the lack of trust--that they have in each other. Trust is the most important lesson that I
have learned over the last few years. As a leader, my sole focus is to keep trust at the forefront
of my mind.

I am also very grateful to have had the opportunity to learn and practice feedback. This has been a
really hard lesson to put into practice (and is actually also one of the Failures that I will be
exploring in a later post). I have seen the fruit of effective feedback and I have seen the negative
outcomes when I have shied away from delivering feedback. Feedback is core to every relationship,
from work to family. I am thankful that I have been able to become aware and start practicing
effective feedback in a work team to learn how to apply it in my personal life.

---

## Resources

1. Brown, Brené. Dare to Lead: Brave Work, Tough Conversations, Whole Hearts. Random House, 2018.
2. Willink, Jocko, and Leif Babin. Extreme Ownership: How U.S. Navy SEALs Lead and Win. First edition, St. Martin’s Press, 2015.
3. Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull Together and Others Don’t. Paperback edition, Portfolio/Penguin, 2017.
4. “Use Situation-Behavior-Impact (SBI)™ to Understand Intent.” CCL, https://www.ccl.org/articles/leading-effectively-articles/closing-the-gap-between-intent-vs-impact-sbii/. Accessed 12 May 2024.
