!! title: [Manager Retro] Success - Positive Leadership Capital
!! slug: retro-success-positive-leadership-capital
!! published: 2024-05-20
!! description: Reflection and gratitude for the positive balance of Leadership Capital

---

As a people manager, I saw my role as a support role. My priority was to get my team what they
needed to make decisions and succeed, not to be the one that constantly made the decisions. This was
was even more important in technical decisions where the senior engineers had more years of
experience solving the technical problems. However, there were times when my role as a people
manager shifted from support to leadership and decisions needed to be made. 

Leading a team as a manager is an incredibly delicate balance. Too much command-and-control withers
away any trust the team has that the leader is looking out for their best interest. Not enough
decisiveness in unknowns and the team loses trust that the leader is a capable leader. The balance
that I was able to strike, while not perfect, has allowed me to depart with a positive balance of
Leadership Capital.

As a recap of Leadership Capital, every decision for action or inaction that a leader makes includes
a trust component for their team. Each decision adds trust to the relationship or removes it
(Willink 2015). These shadow transactions are like deposits in a bank account. There are going to be
times when leaders will make mistakes and trust is withdrawn. In situations where phrases like
"trust me on this" are used, leaders take loans against those accounts. If the team succeeds after
trusting, the loan has been repaid. If they fail after trusting, the leader defaults on the loan.

Similarly to compounding interest, leadership capital grows slowly at first. It takes a lot of little
decisions that add small amounts of trust over long periods of time to build the base. The danger
is that a single decision that has sweeping negative impacts has the potential to bankrupt the
leader. Often these decisions are when the leader sacrifices the team for their own sake (Sinek
2017).

As a manager I focused on those small decisions that added trust to the working relationships of my
team. It was extremely important to me that my team knew that I was there and I had their backs no
matter what. One of the ways that I was able to build and keep a healthy level of Leadership Capital
was to avoid making sweeping decisions that impacted my team without first discussing them with the
team. There were little to no decisions that I made where I expended large portions of the
Leadership Capital that I had worked to build.

This might seem like it was all rainbow and unicorns, but that was not the case. There were multiple
times when there was disagreement on the team in which direction we should go. For each of these
disagreements, we made it a point to have discussions about them, to fully understand what everyone
was thinking and what they saw through their perspectives that others might be missing. Each time we
came out of these discussions with a plan, it was a plan that the team was unified behind.

There are times for command-and-control leadership styles, but even in the military it is only two
percent of the time (Sinek 2017). The rest of the time must be spent cultivating Leadership Capital
and trust between the members of the team in order to weather the storms that come. Every decision
made in the command-and-control leadership style spends Leadership Capital. There are times when the
decision results in a return on investment, but it cannot be a gamble for the success. The account
must be deep enough that it can sustain a full loss of capital from that decision and still recover. 


## Gratitude

Leaders rarely get feedback from their team on their leadership. When they do receive it, it is
often negative feedback; places where they are failing or need to grow rather than what they have
done to better the team. Over the last few weeks since my departure has been announced and the
weight of my influence has shifted, I have had conversations that and received feedback that I would
normally not have had. And I have found that in my departure, there is a positive balance in the
Leadership Capital account. 

I am extremely grateful for the opportunity to have built and led a team. Setting my ego aside, I am
not sure what the VP of Engineering saw to pull me up into this position; to support me as I bumbled
around trying to figure out how to take my individual contributor hat off and replace it with a
people management hat. I have learned a great deal about how different people see the world and have
been required to learn to see the world the way they see it in order to understand, support them and
unite the team.

I am grateful for the team that I had the opportunity to lead. They showed up every day to dive into
the somewhat-controlled chaos that was our ever-changing areas of responsibility. Repeatedly diving
into the unknown is exhausting, but I appreciate the time and energy that the team put in to have
enough trust to experiment to find the ways that worked. Leadership is being the first to dive into
the unknowns (Sinek 2017), knowing my team was right behind me to support made it a lot easier.

---

## Resources

1. Willink, Jocko, and Leif Babin. Extreme Ownership: How U.S. Navy SEALs Lead and Win. First edition, St. Martin’s Press, 2015.
2. Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull Together and Others Don’t. Paperback edition, Portfolio/Penguin, 2017.

