!! title: [Manager Retro] Failure - Building a Value Oasis
!! slug: retro-failure-value-oasis
!! published: 2024-06-24
!! description: Discussing my failure by building a Value Oasis

---

The next failure that we are going to discuss is what Will Larson calls a Value Oasis (Larson 2020).
Before proceeding, I would like to set the stage with what I currently define "DevOps" to be (unless
used as an adjective in front of "engineer" or "team":

> DevOps is a collection of engineering and leadership practices and methodologies that lead to
fast and reliable end user value delivery.

I joined the organization right after the Series A investment as the first DevOps Engineer at the
company. I was excited for the opportunity to be the first DevOps related engineer at the company. I
had the hopes that over time, there would be a career growth opportunity to Lead Engineer. To my
surprise, my manager told me in our first meeting that neither he nor the CTO had ever worked with a
DevOps Engineer and they did not know what to expect.

Instead of being put off by this revelation, I took it as a challenge. I saw an opportunity in front
of my to help shape the DevOps practices and direction at the organization. I felt like I was
essentially being handed a greenfield to own delivering end user value faster and more reliably.

I did not have the prior experience rolling out a DevOps practice for an engineering organization,
so I read as much as I could about DevOps methodologies, scaling technical organizations, and all of
the engineering practices required for high performance value delivery. _Accelerate_ (Forsgren 2018)
was my primary guide and I kept pulse on the State of DevOps reports after the publication of that
book. 

My default view of the world is a holistic one: there are very few things that happen that do not
affect the entire system in some way. With this view, with _Accelerate_, and with _The DevOps
Handbook_ (Kim et al, 2016), I had a pretty good idea of what the technical organization needed to
look like to have the desired outcomes of faster end user value delivery in more reliable ways. And
then I ran into the biggest problem of my career: humans.

Humans are not fully rational beings. Every brain signal is processed through the amygdala first
prior to being sent to the prefrontal cortex for logical processing (Brown 2018). And even when logic
is used, it is based on individual's prior experience which is vastly different than others'
perspectives. This paired with my naïve belief that the level of knowledge from years of experience
in a field carries weight in decisions (an upcoming topic of failure all of its own).

Upon presenting the industry research and the different changes that were needed to deliver end user
value faster and in a more reliable way, it was both ignored and shot down. There were differing
perspectives on how to approach the dependencies and how those dependencies should work. The path to
being a high performing technology organization was blocked. My personal value of being high
performing and working in a high performing organization was blocked from becoming a reality. But
instead of accepting this and readjusting alignment or moving on, I decided not to and continued
working towards high performance anyway. This decision put me and my team up against the
organization structure; the DNA of the organization itself.

Before taking the initial job as a DevOps Engineer, I knew that any organization that was correctly
"doing DevOps" would rarely have a DevOps Engineer or a DevOps team. I made it my mission to accept
the job and then help educated and change the structure. I knowingly took on the task of a culture
paradigm shift.

In addition to _Accelerate_, DevOps practitioners use [MinimumCD](https://minimumcd.org/minimumcd/)
as the practical guide to implementing some of the required engineering practices for fast and
reliable value delivery. Almost all of these practices were outside of the control or field of
direct impact that my team had. Taking on the required paradigm shift created a Value Oasis on the
DevOps team. We were all aligned with MinimumCD, but the rest of the engineering organization was
not onboard. My belief that MinimumCD as the holistic solution to both value delivery and improved
culture across the organization was misaligned with the engineering practices we were executing, and
at the time, I was missing the soft skills required to influence towards MinimumCD (this is still an
area of growth an improvement). In my departure, this misalignment still exists which does not bode
well for the organization. Fortunately for my team, the new director is aligned with MinimumCD as
the solution. But there is still misalignment above at the director level and above. 


## Gratitude

The personal impact of this failure was a challenge for me. The repeated process through my career
of speaking from areas of expertise and not feeling heard challenged my core thinking on personal
identity, personal value, and how to communicate and collaborate with other humans. 

I believe that everyone has a core lie about having value as a human: the more of _X_ a human has
the more valuable they are. It does not matter what _X_ is. Through self-reflection, I have
discovered that my _X_ is knowledge. The more knowledge I possess the more value I have as a human.
This can be seen through my insatiable need to learn and through my ever-growing library of books
(owning books means that I posses the knowledge even if I have yet to read them). The dangerous part
of this core lie is that it is often used as a measuring stick with the other humans around me and
weaponized against those that hurt me. It was this failure of creating the Value Oasis that forced
me to turn inward to discover my core lie and I am grateful for the opportunity that it presented
for the growth in my self awareness.

The self awareness that knowledge and expertise does not equate to value is the root of my
misunderstanding that the more of either that someone has the more others will listen. This
misunderstanding is the reason that mental models cannot be thrown around logically against others'
mental models to affect change. My mental model makes 100% logical sense to me and a discourse
counterpart's mental model makes 100% logical sense to them while both might be completely opposite
views. Throwing one's mental model at someone else and bashing them over the head with it does not
influence them to use that model to see the world.

The Value Oasis failure has given me an example to look back on and see where I could have chosen to
learn about how others see the world, what their mental models look like, and how they are using
them to then have a better chance of affecting change. I still fall into this trap daily and it will
take years of practice to learn that the best way to affect change is to connect as humans and see
the true value that everyone inherently has. 

I am grateful that I had the opportunity to fail in such a large arena to make a lasting impact on
my self awareness, who am I am as a human, how I see the world, and how I see the humans around me.
It is a daily conscious decision of course, and some days are harder than others, but life is so
much better being open and looking for the value that is there rather than closed and taking value
away from others.


---

## Resources

1. Larson, Will. Trapped in a Values Oasis. 18 June 2020, https://lethain.com/values-oasis/.
2. Forsgren, Nicole, et al. Accelerate: The Science behind DevOps: Building and Scaling High Performing Technology Organizations. First edition, IT Revolution, 2018.
3. Kim, Gene, et al. The DevOps Handbook: How to Create World-Class Agility, Reliability, & Security in Technology Organizations. First edition, IT Revolution Press, LLC, 2016.
4. Brown, Brené. Dare to Lead: Brave Work, Tough Conversations, Whole Hearts. Random House, 2018.
5. “Minimum Viable CD.” Minimum CD, https://minimumcd.org/minimumcd/.



