!! title: [Manager Retro] Failure - Trap of the Intervenor
!! slug: retro-failure-trap-of-intervenor
!! published: 2024-07-08
!! description: Discussing the failure of falling into the Trap of the Intervenor

---

System thinking traps are general patterns that result in disturbing the equilibrium of a system
from a specific change (Meadows 2009). The Trap of the Intervenor is when a systemic problem is
solved by someone coming in a fixing a symptom of a problem rather than fixing the underlying
problem. Over time the more times this individual or subsystem intervenes, the more dependent the
larger system becomes on the subsystem to be the solution for the problem rather than fixing the
underlying problem. "Work smarter, not harder" and "treat the cause, not the symptoms" are both
sage wisdom that say that allude to the same thing.

This is often easier said than done. How do we handle the case where all we have are the symptoms
and we don't know what the underlying cause is? If the problem is business critical, we might need
to fix the symptoms and then go hunting for the cause to fix. The harder question is: what do we do
when we are the only one that sees it as a problem and have not been able to convince the rest of
the organization that we need to fix a problem that they have not seen or they outright disagree
that it is a problem? What if this problem is causing a lot of uncomfortable symptoms that I don't
believe are healthy for the team, but we don't have the time to fix them?

I had coffee with a coworker that I really look up to. They are a few years further down the career
path that I am looking to follow. During coffee they asked me what the plan was to find my
replacement and what we were looking for. "Are y'all looking for an individual contributor like
you?". This was a person that I observe be the people manager that I strive to be: supportive and
empowering of their team, leaning on their team and tech leads to make technical decisions, and
staying pretty far away from doing work on the product. In this moment, I realized that I had fully
been caught in the Trap of the Intervenor.

I remember the mental shift that happened a few weeks into my new role as a manager, from
competing and proving to myself over and over again that I was the best engineer (no matter what
team I was on) to becoming a support role. The team's wins were the engineer's wins. The team's
losses and failures were mine. This is what it means to be a great leader (Sinek 2017). I remember
this paradigm shift so vividly because it released the pent up anxiety that I didn't know I had from
the years of competition to be the best engineer. Delegation of technical tasks were easy. 

The next year brought a large project that the entire organization was pressuring the operations
teams into taking on. We asked for support from the rest of the organization, but failed to clearly
communicate that this problem could not be solved solely by our teams. Deadlines were set to create
a false sense of urgency and the teams got to work.

The deadlines being set wreaked havoc on our team's asynchronous Agile processes. The team that I
manage is a global asynchronous team in which communication takes longer. Agile processes like work
estimation and sprint planning take longer. Running an asynchronous poker estimation requires
between 3-5 days to be effective which requires the problem to be fully understood and the work to
be broken down at least a week (essentially mini Waterfall). Once the work has been broken down and
estimated, only then can it be pulled into a sprint and committed. At the very minimum, two weeks
of breakdown and estimation is needed prior to starting on technical implementation. When the
deadline is between two and four weeks away to deliver something massive, there are extreme amounts
of pressure and that pressure immediately destroyed the team processes that we had spent two years
building. 

We were scrambling to meet the deadlines and the only way I believed I could release some of the
pressure from the team was to dust off my individual contributor hat and take the technical helm of
the project. I became the technical lead of the project and even did some coding to get it over the
finish line. While we hit our deadline, I set the precedent that given a lot of pressure from the
organization, I would step in relieve that pressure. I became the solution.

As the steady-state pressures on the team capacity increased over the next year, I failed to
effectively communicate the need for an explicit purpose for the team and the need for more capacity
to meet the growing needs of the organization. I value psychological safety and providing a space
with minimized pressure by high motivation. The environment outside the team was becoming less
conducive to those values. While I believe in humanistic autonomy of decisions, I also believe that
the bounded reality of an actor in a system heavily weight the direction of some of those decisions.
The more pressure mounted on the team without the support required to meet the demands, the more I
started shielding the team, creating a value oasis (Larson 2020). 

It got harder to delegate tasks to the team to fix symptoms when I wasn't making headway on
convincing others outside the team of the gravity of the problem that were causing the symptoms. The
more I failed in convincing, the more my team became the solution to the problem which made it even
harder to convince other that there was a problem. After a few years of failing, any of these
conversations started to look like we were trying to offload our work onto other teams and make our
lives easier rather than fix a systemic issue facing the entire organization.


## Gratitude

This is a tough one. There has been a lot of pain and frustration with this one. The lessons that I
learned from this are a lot more fuzzy than some of the other explicit failures. I learned that
communication is hard and convincing others to see the world from my perspective is extremely
challenging. While I have been aware of some of the communication skills required to have a good
chance of doing this, it is so much easier to throw my perspective and mental model at my
conversational counterpart and then blame them for not being able to see the problem. It is easier
to do this, but highly ineffective when trying to affect change.

The pain and frustration that this has caused in me and on my team is motivation enough to do as
much as I can do to avoid this again in the future. It will be time to put human connection and
communication skills to the test to drive that change. Statements and facts rarely drive change.
Instead, active listening and fully understanding what the other person is saying to the point that
they feel heard (because they were genuinely listened to) invites the other person to think about
new perspectives. When open ended questions of curiosity are asked to help shift my mental model,
they also have an impact on shifting my counterparts model. In asking my counterpart to help me
update my perspective, I invite them to look at my perspective in order to change it. In those
conversations where this happens, both perspectives have a chance to change.

---

## Resources

1. Meadows, Donella H., and Diana Wright. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Earthscan, 2009.
2. Sinek, Simon. Leaders Eat Last: Why Some Teams Pull Together and Others Donâ€™t. Paperback edition, Portfolio/Penguin, 2017.
3. Larson, Will. Trapped in a Values Oasis. 18 June 2020, https://lethain.com/values-oasis/.
