!! title: My Introduction to Project Management 2.0
!! slug: my-intro-to-project-management-two
!! published: 2024-09-02
!! description: My story of being reintroduced to project management.

---

The first class that I signed up for this semester was Engineering Portfolio Management. I did not
really know what to expect. Part of me thought it would be a portfolio of past projects that have
gone well, similar to an artist's portfolio. But that seemed more like a topic for a seminar rather
than a full graduate class. 

After the first day in the Engineering Portfolio Management class, I understood why I did not know
what to expect: my experience with discussions around project management in the software industry
never extended to _programs_ nor to _portfolios_. Most of the projects and environments that I have
worked in professionally have seemed to be the Wild West instead of using the fundabmentals of
project management; including the large scale projects that I have had a part in leading. 


## Introduction 1.0

My first introduction to project management was in my senior year Software Engineering class in
university. We worked in teams of four and the professor introduced us to Scrum and required reports
on estimations and sprint burndown charts. At the time, I thought it was a lot of extra overhead
work that took away from actually getting code written. But then again, it is hard to see the
benefits of a new-to-you framework without the context of months-long projects that require the
collaborative work of many people. Team projects at university were normally only about two weeks
long.

The lesssons learned from the Software Engineering class were helpful going into my first industry
job. While I was a solo engineer on the Software Support team--the catch-all team for everything
that was not net-new development--I was embedded in, and closely observed, the best run engineering
team that I have worked with to date. The performance of the team came from the relationship between
the VP of Operations and the engineering manager reporting into him: the trust that the VP had in
the engineering manager. The engineering teams were run under a tight Scrum process and kept up a
good velocity of value delivery at the end of the sprint every two weeks.

My next role was as a contracted DevOps Engineer at Nike. The organization under the COO was in the
process of migrating to an Agile based project management structure. A consulting firm had been
brought in for a multi-year engagement to move the 1500+ person organization--reporting into the
COO--from traditional project management to an Agile style. It was really interesting to experience
working in a large-scale enterprise, especially during such a large migration.

While the organization was moving the Agile, the division that our team was in was in the middle of
a multi-year migration to SAFe. I got a taste for what it was like strategizing and planning
large-scale projects across hundreds of people. I experienced what PI planning was like in-person
just prior to Covid moving everything remote. The larger the project, the more time and effort is
required for upfront strategy and planning.

Our team reported into the COO's organization rather than the technology organization. While we had
some Operations type work, the majority of our work was project-based, building and delivering
configured servers. We had a full-time Scrum Master on the team working along-side a Product Owner.
They would interface with the Scrum Masters and Product Owners throughout the rest of the division
to keep communication channels open and information flowing. Our team followed the Scrum ceremonies
pretty strictly.

My next role was also as a DevOps Engineer, but this time at a somewhat established, but smaller,
startup. I was the seventh engineer on the team and the first person in Operations; taking over the
operations-type work for the Director of Engineering and the CTO. The environment that I stepped
into was the opposite of the structure that I had gotten used to at Nike. There were little-to-no
project management processes in the development team. When discussions came up about starting to
establish some, there were loud objection from the engineers because of poor past experiences. In an
early software startup, the engineers have a pretty strong voice in any new engineering processes.
Since Operations was outside of the development teams, when the DevOps team grew past a single
engineer, I spun up Kanban. 

About a year in, I was promoted to Lead Engineer on the DevOps team. The Development team was
growing, adding more engineers and managers. They were still struggling to establish a project
management framework and were experiencing the pain points of not having one (difficulties with
capacity planning, strategic work planning, any sort of rough timelines, etc). I thought a tangible
example would help the development teams see the benefits of having a project management style. So
the DevOps team switched from Kanban to Scrum, even though Kanban was a bit more helpful for the
type of work we normally did. After about six months of collecting data, I presented the results of
what Scrum could do for development teams and they decided to adopt it for their own work.

A year later, the DevOps team was force to abandon our project management processes because of
extremely tight deadlines that did not allow room for the necesary processes to work. We spent a
year in fire-fighting mode that led to burnout on the team. Under new leadership, we adopted Scrum
again and were back to having measurable progress towards the projects and goals that the team and
organization had.


## Introduction 2.0

While at Nike and the job previous, I was really only in an observational role. I was not a part of
the larger dicussions about organization project priorities. In my most recent role as a manager, I
was a part of those types of discussions.

All project management frameworks rely on some project management process. Leaders have to be
bought-in to that process and trust the outcomes of the framework. Leaders also need to have a clear
vision of the strategic goals of an organization and how the projects the organization is taking on
are contributing to those goals.

This is where _programs_ and _portfolios_ come it. _Programs_ are a collection of related _projects_
and miscellaneous activities that are better managed together than separately (Schwable 2017).
_Portfolios_ are a collection of _programs_, _projects_, and activities that all correspond directly
to a strategic organization objective (Schwable 2017).

In my last few months in my previous role, I worked alongside the new Director of Cloud Operations
to set our team up for my departure. We immediately spun up a more robust quarterly planning process
for the new teams and grouped all of our projects together (without using the term _program_)
and linked those projects and programs to a departement or organization goal (without using the term
_portfolio_).

Linking projects to strategic organization objectives had been missing for a while. It seemed that
the organization objectives would change a few times per quarter, which invalidated any planning
that had been done. From a purely project management perspective, with projects linked to strategic
organization goals, when those goals changed, we could tell which projects were affected.

Coming out of this first week of school, armed with new terminology and with the [unsurprising]
knowledge that there is a whole new-to-me world to explore in program management and portfolio
management, I am excited to dive in. I am curious what lessons I can learn and how they might relate
back to past experience.


---

## Resources

1. Schwalbe, Kathy. Introduction to Project Management: With a Brief Guide to Microsoft Project Professional 2016. Sixth edition, Schwalbe Publishing, 2017.

