!! title: Workaholism
!! slug: workaholism
!! published: 2024-10-07
!! description: A story of a recovering workaholic

---

I knew I had a problem the moment that I decided to use a mix of alcohol and caffeine as a means to
make it through the next four months. I haven't let my new manager know yet, but I am going back to
school full-time. I'll be working the next four months to set my team and my replacement up for
success as much as I can in my absence. 

Every morning starts with a strong cup of coffee. Within ten minutes, I can feel the tingle in the
brain kicking in from the roughly 175mg of caffeine from the pour-over. Most mornings were filled
with pointless meetings; lots of discussion with no planning or actions items. Two more cups of
coffee get me through. With no time between remote meetings, I settle for K-cup coffee. It
definitely does not taste as good as the artisanal single-origin roast that I have so deeply enjoy.
But it isn't about the taste anyway. With about 105mg of caffeine each, my caffeine intake is now
around 385mg. I know each of these cups of coffee have strong caffeine spikes with strong dips, so
my last caffeinated drink of the day is a sencha and matcha mix that I have taken to. I know the
softer affects of the green tea will let me down more gently into my late morning meetings. My daily
caffeine intake stops at 465mg, tipping over the suggested maximum by the Mayo Clinc. 

By noon, I have switched to water. I find a five minute window to grab lunch between meetings. With
a small window, I grab a bowl of trail mix which has enough calories to tie me over until dinner.
Like most afternoons, there are more meetings. When I am not in meetings, I am having three to five
different conversations over instant messenger. The next meeting is a quarterly planning meeting.
We're working on defining and prioritizing the projects that we have and seeing which ones we need
to postpone until next quarter. The list looks small and unimpressive. But we are an operations
team. 25-50% of the work that we do keeps the other teams functioning as best they can to keep our
products updated and available.

By the end of they day I am mentally exhausted. Everyone that I talked to seems tired too. I am no
longer sure what we are trying to do as a company and I haven't known what my team's role is that
unknown strategy. It isn't that I don't know what we should be doing, it has been a long year of
learning through failure on how to have conversations with executive leadership. Ever since
delivering that big project last year, it has been a scavenger hunt on what the expectations of "be
better" means, but the clue to the location of the next clue wasn't given. 

Too tired to read anything or be social, I pour myself a glass of whiskey and put on a comedy show
while I pick up where I left off in my latest sweater project. Knitting is great in the way that I
can feel productive by doing something while bingeing a show and being unproductive. An hour later
I've completed a few rows in the sweater and pour myself another whiskey. Pausing for a quick
self-analysis, I feel a lot better than I did this afternoon. Dopamine has flooded my brain washing
away the cares of the day. Is this a healthy way to live? Not at all. 89 more days to go.

---

On the other side, I can say with confidence that the problems I was dealing with weren't an
addiction to alcohol or caffeine. The day after my last day, I was back to my normal caffeine intake
of a single coffee and tea a day which I have stuck to 97% of the time since. My consumption of
alcohol stopped immediately.

I had designed and built my life around work. Taking breaks during the day to eat was a nuisance, so
I would eat while I worked. I was in an average of 4 to 6 hours of meetings a day with most of the
gaps filled with asynchronous communication about ongoing problems. A lot of those meetings did not
result in any impactful value delivered for the company.

The more work I did, the less I knew what the purpose was. I knew I had a problem, but I didn't know
what to do to fix it. Counselling or therapy would have been a smart decision. But that's a new
world that I haven't yet learned to navigate. Instead I did the only thing that I knew how to do:
remove the cause of the problem. My job?

My best friends would always tell me "you work too much" and I would laugh it off. Whenever a
holiday would come up, they'd ask me if I was taking any extra time off and I would laugh and come
up with an excuse for why I wasn't. As a manager, it was easy: my team getting extra time off was
more important to make sure they had the rest they needed even if that meant that I worked through.

Was the job really the cause of the problem? Looking back over my career I saw a pattern. My first
two years out of university, I took five whole days off (outside the holidays where the office was
closed). Three of those days were because I was feverish. I burnt myself out and took a seven month
sabbatical to recover before heading back into the industry.

What happened next? I worked for two and a half years with the only time off taken to recover from
COVID. During my first three day family vacation, I was exhausted and a wreck. I woke up the third
day to missed phone calls from the last five hours from multiple people from our global workforce.
Our product had been struggling or unavailable for that time and our reputation was being damaged.

We learned from that experience and set up an on-call rotation to make sure we had coverage while
someone was away on vacation. I also made the decision to take at least a full week off every year
and set it as my birthday week so that I could hopefully remember. For the next few years, I had a
list of house projects to prepare for winter and they fit perfectly in that week off. While I had
time off from work, vacation wasn't part of it.

I found myself considering my PTO balance almost as a badge of honor, not as a serious sign of rest
needed. It wasn't until this year that I decided that I would use my PTO balance and commit to
taking a full week off every quarter. Seven years into my career, I took my first real vacation (not
including the seven month sabbatical). Unfortunately, I was too late to fix the burn out to stay in
my current job.

I do not believe that working over some number of hours a week is workaholism. I also do not think
that working long days is necessarily bad. Long hours working towards a goal that is aligned with
your WHY brings a lot of fulfillment. Workaholism is sacrificing things like relationships, personal
health, and joy to "be more productive". 

The rush of dopamine from checking something off a list. The adrenaline high from the constant
stress of everything being urgent. Dollars in a bank account that constantly lose value. Insurance
for later in life in the form of assets. These are all supposed to give life, not demand a life
sacrifice for these. They should be the means to the end. The end should not be sacrificed for the
means.

I am at the very beginning of my recovery journey; starting in on 2 years of graduate school where
the temptation to overwork is high. But it is also a place to build the habits that I need without
my crutch of "people at work depending on me". I am going to keep my commitment of one full week off
per quarter.

---

## Resources

1. Mayo Clinc: https://www.mayoclinic.org/healthy-lifestyle/nutrition-and-healthy-eating/in-depth/caffeine/art-20045678
