!! title: Getting to "No"
!! slug: getting-to-no
!! published: 2025-02-03
!! description: A discussion on the information gather technique of getting to "no"

---

As an engineer by trade and introvert in personality, one of my least developed skills is sales. The
thought of executing a sale (including selling myself through my resume) is overwhelming. 

Friday night, at a social dance, I was reminded of the importance of getting to the first "no".  It
had been a long week of sleepless nights and I had low energy. I decided to lean into the _social_
part of social dancing by sitting and having a conversation with one of the follows. The
conversation turned to sales and learning about sales techniques. One of the techniques that the
follow uses in their sales job is the idea getting to the first "no" as fast as possible. 

_Never Split the Difference_ (Voss and Raz) has been one of the most influential books that I have
read in the last five years. I picked it up on recommendation from a coworker in reference to
negotiating private sales. I am constantly surprised at how much it has shaped how I approach human
connection (which sounds weird since it is a book on applying hostage negotiation techniques to
every day life).

Getting to "no" is one of the information gathering techniques covered early on in the book, but was
easily overshadowed by three others that I have found used on an almost-daily basis: "What & How"
(which I have written about in [this series](./posts/what-how-overview)), labeling, and mirroring.
Successful negotiation is all about real human connection, to figure out what your counterpart
really wants to be able to give that to them in exchange for the thing that you want: creating a
win-win situation.

A sale is often set up as a trade between two parties. One party has a problem and is willing to
trade something (often money) for the solution offered by another party. Each party comes to the
table with both public and hidden information. A game of sales is often modeled as the seller trying
to maximize the sale price and the buyer trying minimize it. However, the hidden information is key
to understanding what the other party actually wants. Taking a step back from this model, it seems
like the underlying desire of both parties is to walk away with a mutually agreed upon value
exchange, both feeling that the value exchange was fair (the "F-bomb" that should be used with
extreme caution in any negotiation). 

Both parties are investing time into the negotiation and don't want to waste it. Using the word "no"
seems like a quick way to end the negotiation and walk away with nothing to show for it. However, it
is also a safe word. "Yes" is communicating that I am committing to something, which can be scary if
I don't feel like I have enough information to actually make a decision. As a buyer, "no" is a safe.
It doesn't commit to something that I am not yet fully onboard with.

As a seller, "no" is also a way to provide saftey for the buyer to commit. Asking a "yes" question in
the form of a "no" question helps give the power of decision to the buyer. They don't feel rushed
into making a decision without taking the time they need. If a buyer is dragging their feet on
signing a contract, a question like "Would it be crazy to expect the contract to be signed by end of
day today?" helps get the commitment. 

I used this technique with a past manager to short-circuit what was often a multi-day Slack
conversation with high risk of ghosting. "Would it be crazy for me to expect X, Y, Z by EoD
tomorrow?" Within ten minutes I not only had an answer, but had a meeting on the calendar to discuss
what I needed.

If the question doesn't end in an immediate commitment, it uncovers additional information about
blockers. Behind every first "no" is some of that hidden information about what the other party
truly wants. That first "no" is often followed by an explanation as to why, which is a valuable
piece of information that the other party is working with. It is also the signal that you are in
collaboration toward a common goal.

The success of a negotiation may not be what either party thinks it is before going in. It is all
about activley listening to your counterpart and finding a way to solve their problem, even if you
or your product/service is not the solution.

Wait what? How is it that a negotiation can be successful without either party getting what they
came in after? Take the exmaple of a salary negotiation (assuming that the value of the job is only
monetary and no other intrinsic motivations exist). If I believe that I am worth _X_ amount of
dollars and a company will only pay me _0.75 * X_, it is a win-win for me to walk away. If I
compromise and accept the job at _0.75 * X_, I become a high risk of becoming bitter about not
being paid what I think I am worth which will negatively affect both my performance and the
performance of the team that I am on. If the company compromises and raises their salary to _X_,
there is a risk that I have overvalued myself and do not have the organizational impact to match.

Walking away in a win-win situation where you helped solve their problem builds future value. That
could look like accepting a job with a salary slightly higher than you were expecting and giving
more energy to the company than you would have to help solve their biggest problems. Or it might
mean declining the job and referring someone else in your network that would be a better fit. 

Getting to "no" lowers the stress of commitment and helps gather more information, whether in a
negotiation setting or even in connecting as humans in a social setting. 

---

## Resources

1. Voss, Christopher A., and Tahl Raz. Never Split the Difference: Negotiating as If Your Life Depended on It. First edition, HarperBusiness, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers, 2016.

