!! title: Intangibility of Software
!! slug: software-intangibility
!! published: 2025-02-16
!! description: Reminiscing of simpler days where wood was the medium of choice rather than bits bytes.

---

I grew up with a very active imagination and an almost-overuse of my hands. The days between the
ages of 6 and 10 were filled with creating whole worlds out of small building blocks. During the
summers we would take field trips to the local library and exchange one stack of books for another.
We would take them home and recreate what we found between the pages with cardboard and duct tape
(which turned out to be my favorite past time). 

Suits of armor made of cardboard sat in the corner ready to be donned at a moments notice. Shields
of scrap plywood and swords made of wood hung on the walls. The windmills in the backyard were not
going to topple themselves. I had to be prepared.

When I was 10, the trajectory of my life was further set. It was sometime in August and my
grandparents had come to visit. My grandfather--being the handiest man that I have ever met--was
working on a house project. Living by the rule "always use the best tool for the job" he went out
and bought a scroll saw to custom cut a piece he needed. When the project was completed and my
grandparents went back home, the scroll saw stayed, and I graduated from cardboard and duct tape to
wood and glue.

There's so much more you can do with a tool that has the ability to cut intricate pieces from wood.
My imagination was the only limiting factor. Navies of little wooden boats were made, sculptures
following the style of Heather Jansch were glued together from unusable offcuts, plywood was turned
into something.

![Head of a Hawk from plywood](/posts/0079/plywood-hawk.jpg)

I love creating and I found a way to make it my career: in being a force multiplier for
organizations, creating solutions to problems to help teams and individuals have larger impacts.
However, there is still something that often calls me back to youth in a simpler time where it was
just wood as the medium of expression.

I am reminded of an observation a dear friend and mentor mentioned in a passing conversation: the
intangibility of software drives engineers to hobbies that are tangible. Woodworking results in
something you can see, touch, and smell. Gardening results in something you can taste. Software is
none of those things.

We spend our days deep in our minds wrestling with unique mental models of the system that we are
working on, something that lives in silicone rarely manifesting into the material world. There are
those few that write code that moves a mechanical arm or moves control surfaces of an aircraft,
where the intangible becomes tangible, but there are so many more that write code that lives its
entire life in a server in a data center somewhere. The only way we know that it exists is because
of the lines on a graph somewhere. We may see the impression that it has on the world--a package
showing up on your doorstep after clicking the "Add to Cart" button on a website a few days
before--but we can't touch the code. We can't apply a little bit more pressure here or a stretch
there to form it into something new. It is just high and low voltages racing along highways etched
into silicone. 

One of the most difficult skills to learn is how to communicate these imaginary systems with others.
There isn't a physical model that you can pick up and rotate to understand. It is a lot of boxes and
lines drawn on a whiteboard, showing how data flows through the system. And this process is even
fallible. Does it model the system closely enough for one engineer to be able to share their mental
model with another? Is the state of the model a snapshot in time, or does it need to be accompanied
by a verbal explanation from the author to help with the dynamic flow?

The most frustrating conversations that I have been a part of have been system design conversations.
From my experience taking on maintenance of production systems, it takes hours of walking through
system design documents with senior engineers to fully grasp how a system and all of its subsystems
work together to make up the whole. And on the flip side, trying to find the correct words to
explain something that you have designed is challenging, and the challenge is amplified when in
conversations with people who are not naturally curious.

The amount of money that exchanges hands for the intangibility of these bits and bytes is
overwhelming. Billions of dollars are spent on these system living in data centers with only a
virtual representation. It is like someone buying a vacation house from only hand drawn sketches and
then never actually visiting. Maybe the house exists and is being used as a vacation rental, or
maybe it doesn't and someone is just depositing money into your bank account.

And yet, the world keeps spinning. Bits and bytes sit on disks waiting for their turn to race along
the silicone highways, for a chance to jump out along the fiber lines and go for an adventure.
Packages are bought and sold, sorted and shipped. Bank transactions flow from one account to
another, changing the digital balances in accounts. Aircraft move people and cargo from one place to
another and space craft launch to explore that which is far away.

The tangible is needed, to stay grounded in reality and to avoid getting lost in cyber space. The
smell of fresh-cut pine and the silkiness of sawdust is an experience that cannot be replicated in
the virtual. Only the imagination is the limit and the world is open for exploration.

![DIY Skin-on-frame Kayak](/posts/0079/sof-kayak.jpg)
