!! title: Strategy & Tactics
!! slug: strategy-and-tactics
!! published: 2025-03-31
!! description: A recent story about failed strategy and what I learned about myself.

---

I have been reflecting on the difference between strategy and tactics through the perspective of a
recent semi-emergency event. The experience made me start to wonder where my current strengths and
weaknesses lie.

---

A few friends and I were a hour outside of town, headed out on a weekend trip when the engine
suddenly seized and threw a rod. The car immediately started to decelerate with smoke coming out of
the engine compartment. This was my first experience of a roadside breakdown/emergency, at least
that I can remember. Somehow I have been able to make it my entire life without a flat tire or
mechanical issue, which left me woefully unprepared in this situation.

Taking cues from my fellow passengers, we piled out of the car (which made sense in hindsight with
the smoke coming from the engine and fire often being paired with smoke). Once the smoke stopped and
the engine cooled (so that it wouldn't spontaneously combust), we popped the hood to take a look.
Sure enough, there was a hole in the engine block with shrapnel throughout the engine compartment.
This car wasn't going to be driving anytime soon.

Without conversations happening, someone made the decision that we needed to push the car to a safer
spot further up the road where the shoulder was wider. Phone calls were being made to family friends
with car trailers and to local towing companies to get quotes on towing. All the while, I was
standing on the side of the highway, being available to help in whatever way I could, but wondering
what the end goal was. Any ideas that I had to help did not seem very valuable because I couldn't
tell where we were going. Was the whole group still trying to make it to our destination? Were we
all going back to town? Something else?

As it turns out, we got a tow to the closest town. The passengers got picked up by a family friend
and brought back to town. We left early the next morning in a different vehicle to still make the
event we were going to. The car was towed back to town a few days later.

---

My current skillset in relation to strategy and tactics are to approach them separately. Strategy
answers the question "Where are we going?" and tactics answers the question "How do we get there?".
These are often separated in hierarchical social structures such as a company or the military.
Higher ranking personnel are in charge of defining the strategy and their reports are in charge of
designing and executing the tactics.

This vehicle emergency situation was significantly different than
[my experience in wilderness emergency response](/posts/ops-leadership-learn-from-failure), this
situation didn't have a clearly defined goal. In wilderness first response, the goal is to triage
the victim(s) and get them to a medical provider as soon as necessary. This goal does not change
from one emergency to another. In contrast, the tactics required to get to the undefined goal in the
vehicle emergency wildly varied. The actions required to get everyone to the destination were very
different than the actions required to arrive at the destination that night, with the possibility
with a smaller travel party.

In computer science, there is a subset of problems called pathfinding. Pathfinding problems can be
abstracted to model strategic problem solving by creating a current state (being broken down on the
side of the highway) and defining the desired end state (the entire travel party arriving at the
destination). Pathfinding algorithms then use different strategies to find the best path from the
current state to the desired state. Examples of these algorithms include Dijkstra's, A*, BFS, and
DFS.

On the side of the highway, I found myself stuck trying to define the desired state so that we could
effectively plan a path from where we were (essentially an A* search). In management theory, this is
called a gap check (Sniegocki). However, because the desired state was unknown, this approach was
not effective. Instead, the approach that the group successfully took was to find the next best
action and take it and then reevaluate to find the next best step until a satisfactory solution was
found (essentially a depth-first search). 

---

I am reminded of a quote by the chess Grand Master Garry Kasparov:

> “Tactics is knowing what to do when there is something to do. Strategy is knowing what to do when
> there is nothing to do.” – Garry Kasparov

The strategy that I employed in this situation was ineffective, as there was no defined goal. I
learned a lot about myself through this experience. My current strengths in strategy and tactics
come when they separated and can be worked through independently. My current area of improvement is
when there is ambiguity in the overall goal, or when tactics have a very short feedback loop that
has a significant impact on the overall goal which then changes the strategy.

---

## Resources

1. Sniegocki, Liz. “5 Everyday Strategic Habits for HR and People Ops Pros | LifeLabs Learning.” Https://Www.Lifelabslearning.Com, https://www.lifelabslearning.com/blog/5-everyday-strategic-habits-for-hr-and-people-ops-pros. Accessed 31 Mar. 2025.
