!! title: Transferable Management Skills to Life
!! slug: management-skills-to-life
!! published: 2025-04-29
!! description: A quick discussion around two management skills that I have found valuable in life.

---

I am learning that the people skills that I developed as a people manager extend far beyond the
professional setting. I knew this in a theoretical sense, but seeing it in practice has been more of
a challenge. This can mostly be attributed to my personal living situation where the people I have
seen and interacted with for the last few years have been my immediate family. There are already
social expectations and deep shared history built into those relationships. Communication patterns
have already been formed.

In new social situations, the active listening skills that I developed have been extremely handy.
Granted, active listening skills are not specific to being a people manager, but they are especially
important to continually develop in such a role. As engineers, we spend a lot of time developing our
logical and spatial intelligences [3], but it seems to be rare to develop interpersonal intelligence
alongside.

My experience in early education was that someone could be good at math or good at writing, but not
at both. My brain (either from nature or nurture) seemed to gravitate towards the rigid structure of
math and logic rather than the more fluid world of writing or art. Along with the attraction to
logic came the generalized personality of being quiet, introverted, and somewhat socially awkward.
My education history of changing schools multiple times and then eventually homeschooling added to
the development of this personality.

Becoming a people manager requires the development of interpersonal intelligence. In doing so, the
most important skill that I learned (or maybe re-learned) is having curiosity. Approaching every
person and every conversation with a posture of curiosity and learning creates an openness to allow
both people to be who they are and to collaborate in the conversation. Not needing the other person
to be someone they are not immediately diffuses most of the possible tension. It also helps frame
conversations into discussion questions rather than into accusations: learning how to ask questions
to understand the other person's perspective and sharing your personal experience rather than
stating an accusation like "You did ... x,y,z" which doesn't allow for space to be anything other
than the accusation and defense.

Tough conversations are also an experience that people managers have. Often, tough conversations can
have high emotions to navigate as jobs are how people support themselves and their families.
Performance conversations can quickly threaten this livelihood which creates an environment that has
high emotions. Yet as managers, we are dually responsible to care for our team and for the
performance of our team. This includes supporting team members in making needed adjustments. These
conversations require immense amounts of vulnerability from the leader, coming in with armor off [2]
and looking to support the other person's growth.

Life partnerships have these types conversations, where emotions have the potential to run high.
Having the experience navigating high emotion situations in a professional setting has prepared me
to navigate them in an arguably more important setting (to me) in my life partnership.

I am really grateful for my experience as a people manager and the skills that I developed during
that time. I consider them some of the most important and most valuable skills that I have learned
in life. 


---

## Resources

1. “Howard Gardner’s Theory of Multiple Intelligences | Center for Innovative Teaching and Learning.” Northern Illinois University, https://www.niu.edu/citl/resources/guides/instructional-guide/gardners-theory-of-multiple-intelligences.shtml. Accessed 9 Mar. 2025.
2. Brown, Brené. Dare to Lead: Brave Work, Tough Conversations, Whole Hearts. Random House, 2018.

