---
title: "Operational Leadership - Learning from Failure"
slug: ops-leadership-learn-from-failure
published: 2024-03-10
description: >
  The story of when I learned more about operational leadership in three hours than my entire career
  in software operations.

---

It was complete chaos. Rescuers were running back and forth between scenes. There was a constant
stream of victim vital data flowing in on the radio. Radio communication was breaking down. Extra
rescue teams were being sent out to provide support where they could, but then getting split up when
one of the another victims needed more help. There were too many rescuers attending victims
that did not need it and not enough for the ones that did. It was madness.

---

We were on day six or seven of a nine day Wilderness First Responder course to be trained and
certified in backcountry medicine. A few hours before, an operations manager and communications
officer had been chosen by the instructors as the leaders of the emergency scenario. The rest of the
group was split up into teams of two rescuers. We had just gotten two rescue calls. There was a
pretty bad ATV accident, and a hiker that fell and probably broke their leg. They were both in the
same vicinity but about a mile apart (but in reality, closer to 25 meters). In total, we knew we
had three victims before we set out.

The initial wave of three rescue teams were sent out from the base of operations to each of the
known victims. My partner and I were held back at base as one of the auxiliary rescue team to lend
support to the initial teams as needed. Almost as soon as the initial teams arrived on scene, the
radio started blowing up with initial descriptions of what they were seeing. The communication
protocol that we had been learning for the last few days was immediately forgotten.

At the scene of the ATV accident, the driver had a part of the ATV lodged in their abdomen. Their
passenger had been thrown and had a significant amount of blood covering their face. They could not
see and they were scared. And a mile away, the hiker seemed to have a complete fracture of the femur. 

As these descriptions were coming in over the radio, the auxiliary teams were dispatched out to the
scene of the ATV accident. My partner and I headed to the ATV passenger. When we got there, a full
head-to-toe had not yet been completed. There was a lack of physical space around the victim and no
actual role for my partner or I to take on. No sooner had we settled into some sort of support role
for the initial rescue team, the communications officer got in touch with my partner and asked us to
split up. The hiker was in a lot of pain and that team needed extra support. I would stay with the
initial team and my partner would head over to the hiker.

A little while later, the operations manager radioed all of the teams asking for any available hands
to head to the hiker. They had decided that she needed to be moved since she would not be walking any
time soon. We needed at least eight people to move her on a backboard (the initial rescue team and
the full force of the auxiliary teams that had already been dispatched to the ATV scene).

I left the ATV scene and headed towards the scene of the injured hiker. One of the initial rescuers
of the ATV passenger victim decided that victim seemed stable enough to leave only the one rescuer
there with a radio to help move the hiker. When I got to the hiker, the rescuers did not have a
backboard, they had not completed their head-to-toe which needed to be finished before the hiker
could safely be moved, and it seemed like the overall scene was in a bit of disarray.

While we were waiting for the head-to-toe to be completed and the backboard to be brought, a frantic
call came over the radio. The victim that I just left had fallen unconscious. Worsening symptoms in
the backcountry is never a good thing and falling unconscious is a really bad sign. My partner
immediately left to help with the initial rescuer of the ATV passenger that had come with me to help
move the hiker. I decided to stay with the hiker group to help pull the disarray together.

Some quick observation showed that the initial rescuer that had taken lead of the hiker scene upon
arrival was really struggling to remember the processes and checklists that we needed to complete. I
made the decision to take over as lead of the scene. It was not the most graceful execution I could
have done and there is probably a more diplomatic way of handling the situation. I asked if I could
help, and then gently took over control while they gave it up. The other rescuers looked relieved
and mouthed their thanks silently as things got back under control and started moving in the
direction of stabilization. 

The head-to-toe was completed and we got the first set of vitals soon to follow and started gather
medical history information. The backboard arrived and we got the victim situated, put out the call
that the hiker was ready to be moved, and went into vital monitoring mode. As there were more severe
victim cases elsewhere, we were told that we would be waiting for a bit. The scenario was called a short
time later. 

---

## Lessons Learned 

This three hour scenario has taught me a lot about leadership and operations management. I learned a
number of things that are extremely important and I continue to look back on this experience and
learn even more.


### Communication & Protocols

We started the scenario without any protocol for radio usage on a shared channel which quickly made
the radio almost impossible to use. It got to the point where the communication officer was running
between the groups and the operations manager to retrieve and deliver the health information. While
this worked in reality, if we had been a mile apart like in the initial description of the scenario,
this would have been impossible.

For the week previous to the exercise, we had all been learning about SOAP Notes (Subjective,
Objective, Assessment, and Plan) and how they are used in healthcare communication (Podder). We
learned how and why the structure of it was important given high interference on radio
transmissions. Instead of gathering all of the situational information and composing a SOAP notes
report to send a full picture to the operations manager (which would have taken about 15-20
minutes), initial rescuers felt that immediate communication and action was needed. This made the
time-to-first-call extremely short, but it significantly increased the amount of time to get a clear
picture of how the victim was. The operations manager did not get a full SOAP on any of the three
victims.


### Data Driven Decisions

Almost all of the decisions in the scenario were made reactively from the subjective descriptions
from the rescuers. We had all learned the SOAP Notes documentation method and how useful it was for
recipients to use a widely known structure of delivering healthcare information. Using an unstable
radio connection, the recipient knows how to map the incoming information to the chart and know what
to anticipate. If the radio cuts out during the transmission, the recipient can easily ask for a
repeat of the entire SOAP (a single page that takes about 20 seconds to read). This can be done
until the full report is received.

All of the initial rescuing teams immediately started communicating the state of their victim which
flooded the radio channel with information that was difficult to assign to the victims. From the
perspective of the rescuing team, they were getting the information back the operations manager as
fast as possible, but most of it was not truly actionable.

However, it was an emergency scenario with a time pressure. So the manager felt the need to take
immediate action, even though there was no data to tell where the auxiliary teams should be
dispatched. So we were all dispatched evenly throughout the victims until later needed.


### Resource Management

Before the scenario started, I overheard one of the instructors prepping our operations manager. In
that brief was a hint that keeping auxiliary teams at base until they were needed should be
considered. Initially we were kept at base. But as soon as the first victim descriptions came over
the radio, the operations manager was spurred into action and started dispatching all auxiliary
teams to help. When the auxiliary teams were needed elsewhere, they were pulled back and redeployed.
This happened multiple times as the operations manager got more data. If we had been one or more miles
apart like in the scenario, redeployment would have been an easy option.


### Time Management

There was a time management portion to the lessons that I learned. Interestingly, the underlying
issue to the chaos was that decisions were being made quickly and without the correct supporting
data. The time pressure of the emergency (on both the rescuers and the operations manager), the
information communication rate, and the delay of the full picture coming from what should have been
SOAP reports from the initial rescuing team, all led to a oscillatory system in available rescuers in
the auxiliary teams.

A possible approach that might have led to less chaos is to thank the initial rescuers for the data
and then request them to keep the line clear until their SOAP notes were ready. This would have
decreased the amount of activity for the operations manager, but would have also decreased the
amount of radio chatter and would have prevented the oscillations in auxiliary team availability
based on no data. This policy change would need to be tested through simulation or experiment.


### Leadership

The lesson on leadership was an interesting one. My takeover of the hiker victim scene did not sit
well with me. In reality, we were all there to learn, and struggling through remembering what to do
would have been the best way for my fellow student to learn. The main memories and lessons I have
from this scenario were where we failed as a group or where I failed as an individual. I have very
little recollection of the things we did right. By taking over the scene, I also took away the
opportunity for that student to learn through their failures.

I do not regret the decision I made and I would make the same decision again today. However, the
leader I am now would circle back to apologize after the scenario was over; to mend any rift in the
working relationship and to build back trust between me and the initial rescuer that took lead. I
have been in similar situations in my professional career in engineering operations where decisions
need to be made and they need to be made quickly. Circling back to rebuild trust is even more
important in a long term professional setting where you work side-by-side with people for years
instead of the scenario where the rescuers barely knew each other.

There are crucial decisions that leaders have to make, and sometimes these decisions are between two
solutions that both have significant costs. This decision is an example of one of them (and I talk
about one in my second week of being a manager [here](./posts/0020-e2m-marbles)).


### Command & Control

It was not until last year that I learned about the important components of what makes command and
control work. Emergency situations more often than not require some amount of command and control.
But it is what is done outside of the command and control situations that build the trust required
for successful command and contorl. A high performing military team may need to operate in command
and control, but they only do it about 2% of the time. The other 98% of the time is spent doing
exercises and team bonding to build the trust required for that 2% (Willink).

Unfortunately in engineering operations, often times there is little effort invested in that 98% of
the time. It seems like it is from one fire to the next; one emergency to the next. Creating
independence and self-organizing sub-teams is very challenging in such an environment.


### Importance of Role-playing and Simulation

This entire scenario was fictitious. No one actually got in an ATV accident and there was not a
hiker who actually snapped their femur. However, in this fictitious three hour scenario, I learned
more about how to run operations under pressure than in years of working in operations. Role-playing
and simulation is a very important part of Systems Thinking and Systems Dynamics. It allows for the
testing of policies and policy changes in a safe environment. "In many cases controlled experiments
are prohibitively costly or unethical" (Sterman 21). 


---

## Resources

1. Podder V, Lew V, Ghassemzadeh S. "SOAP Notes". StatPearls Publishing, 2023,
   https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK482263/. Accessed 09 Mar. 2024
2. Sterman, John D. Business Dynamics : Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World.
   Boston, Irwin, 2000.
3. Willink, Jocko. Critical Leadership Training. In: Masterclass. Available from:
   https://www.masterclass.com/classes/critical-leadership-training-with-navy-seal-officer-jocko-willink-continuous-cut.
   Accessed 06 Sept. 2023
