---
title: "[Manager Retro] Past Success Does Not Predict Future Success"
slug: retro-success-does-not-predict-success
published: 2024-06-10
description: >
  Wrapping up the initial collection successes and intro into the long list of failures and lessons.

---

Success is a fickle thing. People define their success in different ways. Success is having more
money than you need so you can have whatever you want and not work again. Or maybe success is having
the power to influence those around you. Or maybe success is the amount of time you get to spend
with your family. Or maybe success is having more good and great days than bad days. In the recent
decades the advice has been to "define your own success", whether this is individual success to
better your mental health or the success of an entrepreneur. 

At its core, stories of success are often told to sell, whether monetarily or socially it does not
matter. But success stories are incomplete or inaccurate. Reducing the messiness and complexities of
life and all of the variables impacted the success in the end creates a clarity that did not
actually exist (Holiday 2016). They are often used to build up the protagonist in a
greater-than-human fashion and falsely sells the way to success.

Success stories are attempts to condense nonlinear dynamic systems into a linear sequence of events
that others can follow like a map. These systems can include the complex social and strategic sports
teams, the sociological systems around politics and economics, the complex social and economic
systems of business, or many other complex systems. Understanding how a system interacts over time
requires simplified models of reality (Sterman 2009). If the model contained all variables in
reality, it would be just as complicated and not useful in helping humans with understanding the
outcomes.

The danger in attempting to provide such a map to success is that it is often from only the author's
mental model. The complexity of the reality that led to the success cannot be accurately condensed
into a linear story. The parts chosen to tell are only that which the author thinks impacted the
success. It may not include the half-forgotten challenges that required perseverance to work
through. It may not include the flash of inspiration that came out of nothing at all. It may not
include the small buildup of impacts from all of the people around and what they contributed.

Past success does not predict future success. Accurate maps to success cannot exist because the full
reality that led to past successes cannot be fully understood. Even if it could be understood, it
would not be able to be recreated. Some of the parts of the system will never be the same again. As
an example, timing is really important. When something is before its time it will not catch on
because the timing is not right. However, tried again at the right time, it might take off.

Even though past success does not predict future success, this is a core business belief. While
hiring, companies and teams are looking for past success to bring to the team. Companies and
organizations are looking for leaders that have been successful in the past to come help them be
successful now and in the future. This false belief sets up the individual and the organization for
failure. 

As an example of what this looks like in the business world, let's say we have a small company of
ten people that was built and sold ten years from founding at exit for a considerable amount of
money. This would be considered a business success. And now the same founders create a brand new
business with all of the same people. One would assume that the failures previously ran into would
be learned from and bypassed the second time around. However, wouldn't bypassing the failure change
the actions that were taken to get to success the first time? How would we know it was not the
failure itself that contributed to the success rather than the specific actions taken after?

There are no easy ways to success. The ones that have achieved it say that it only comes when not
pursuing it.  Success stories can really only be used positively to inspire others, but have not
value in showing the way. The most impactful stories are the ones that serve others, not the ones
that build up and sell the hero (Quesada 2024). If someone needs to be inspired to overcome
challenges in front of them, tell a story that they need to hear. Focusing on the outcomes rather
than the process to get there is worth little. As clich√© as it is, the journey is more important
than the destination. Enjoy the journey and the destination will not matter. 


---

## Resources

1. Holiday, Ryan. Ego Is the Enemy. Portfolio, Penguin, 2016.
2. Sterman, John D. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World. Nachdr., Irwin/McGraw-Hill, 2009.
3. Quesada, Kate. https://www.katiequesada.com/workshops. Accessed 2024.

